<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
	<title>Butterflies</title>
	<link href="style.css" media="screen" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFF1">
%%%% 335 page

<p class="family-heading">Genus <b>LEPTOSIA</b> H\dd{u}bner.</p>

<p><i>Leptosia</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1818, p. 13; Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 54; Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 19; Bingham, 1907, p. 137; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 121; Hemming, 1931 <i>a</i>, p. 273; id., 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 129 (type, <i>chlorographa</i> H\dd{u}bn.); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 63, 65; Peile, 1937, p. 41.</p>

<p><i>Nina</i>, Horsfield, 1829, p. 140 (type, <i>nina</i> Fabr.). </p> 

<p><i>Nychitona</i>, Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 41 (type, <i>dorothea</i> Fabr.). Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 117.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>L. chlorographa</i> H\dd{u}bn.</p>

<p><i>Imago</i>.&#x2014;Fore wing: costa slightly arched, apex very broad and greatly rounded; outer margin convex; tornus obtuse; inner margin straight, only a little shorter than the costa; cell long, more than half the length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 coincident; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; 5 from the cell with a very short <i>mdc</i>, or connate with the stem of 7+8 and 9, or shortly stalked; <i>ldc</i> long, curved. Hind wing: costa very slightly arched; outer margin strongly arched; inner margin straight or slightly arched; cell elongate, more than half the length of wing; precostal vein short, strongly curved distad; 5 and 6 connate from the cell or <i>mdc</i> very short; <i>udc</i> long, concave; 7 from the cell well distad; 8 slightly curved at base, then straight, extended very close along the costal margin. Antenn{\ae} slender, not quite half the length of the fore wing; club long, gradual, slightly flattened. Palpi short and slender, segments 2 and 3 short, the third much shorter than the second. Eyes naked; body slender.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i>. (See <i>nina nina</i> (Fabr.)).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, India, Burma,</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span> to Hainan and South China, south to the Lesser Sunda Islands and Celebes; also in Africa. About four species known, with only one in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">95. <b>Leptosia nina nina</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 108, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xiphia</i>, Fabricius, 1781, p. 43.</p>

<p><i>Papilio nina,</i> Fabricius, 1793, p. 194 (nom. nov. pro <i>xiphia</i>, pr{\ae}occ.).</p>

<p><i>Leptosia nina nina,</i> Yates, 1931 <i>a</i>, p. 1006; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>. p. 65, pl. vii, fig. B 1; Peile, 1937, p. 41, pl. vi, fig. 39 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Nychitona xiphia,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 118, pl. xlvi, figs. 6, 6 <i>a</i>; id., 1886, p. 45 (Mergui); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 569; Ormiston, 1924, p. 81.</p>

<p><i>Leptosia xiphia,</i> Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 585; Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 20, pl. 559, figs 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 138, fig. 36; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 121, t. 62 <i>f</i>; Bell, 1912, pp. 1145-7, pl. i, fig. 58 ({\male}) (life-history); Ormiston, 1917, p. 126  (Ceylon).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white, the bases of the wings very slightly powdered with minute black scales. Fore wing: costa speckled obscurely with black; apex and outer margin with black border to vein 3, broader at the apex, where it is angulate at vein 6; a very large, somewhat pear-shaped postdiscal spot also black. Hind wing uniformly white; in most specimens an obscure fine marginal black line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white; costal margin and apex of fore wing broadly, and the whole surface of the hind wing irrorated with transverse, very slender, greenish strig{\ae} and minute dots; these on the hind wing have a tendency to form sub-basal, median, and discal obliquely transverse obscure bands. Fore wing with post-discal black spot as on upperside; outer margins of both wings with minute black, short, transverse slender lines at the apices of the veins that have a tendency to coalesce and form a marginal line as on the upperside. {\female} with the black markings on upperside of fore wing usually slightly broader. Antenn{\ae} dark brown spotted with white, head brownish, thorax and abdomen white.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 35-50 mm.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1912):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Cylindrical, slightly swollen in the middle, becoming abruptly narrow at the top; thirteen longitudinal ribs of triangular section, of which only six reach the top, where their ends, as minute teeth, surround the flat end. Colour blue.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Grey-green, with an indistinct supraspiracular dark line, below which is a whitish spiracular line; a dark dorsal line. The body is crossed transversely by depressed lines at equal distances from each other; between these lines are rows of black, erect, short bristles, surrounded at their bases by a circular green mark; there is a single row between each two lines; interspersed among these bristles are a few white cylindrical tubercles bearing each an erect, white, long hair generally carrying at its tip a drop of amber-coloured transparent liquid; these long hairs are most numerous on segments 2, 12, and 13. Length 17 mm., breadth 2.5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Slight and delicate-looking. Cremaster stout, square, with a dorsal depression near hind margin. Surface glabrous, very minutely transversely striated, shiny. Very transparent green, often suffused with pink; a dorsal and lateral brown line, sparsely covered with obsolescent pink-brown spots; a lateral row of black spots on segments 3 to 12, those on 5 exuding a black or white liquid which dries like gum: there is one spot on each segment; beak yellow, with a median ring of seven black spots. Length 13.6 mm., breadth 3 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1912).&#x2014;Egg laid on the underside of a leaf near the ground, generally on a young leaf. The larva lives on the underside of a leaf as a rule, but may be found on the upperside. Foot-plants: capers. Has been bred upon <i>Capparis heyneana</i> Wall. and <i>Crat{\ae}va religiosa</i> Forst. f., in Kanara. The larva grows rapidly, and the pupal stage lasts about a week.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a very weak flier, and may at all times be found in the undergrowth, fluttering along weakly, with the wings held horizontally, open for longer intervals than is usual with other Pierines. It is conspicuous when flying, but at rest becomes nearly invisible from the pattern of greenish strig{\ae} and lines which cover the exposed parts of the wings; it rests usually on the underside of a leaf, on a thin upright stem or on a dead stick.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, Peninsular India</span> to Mussooree, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, and the <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>. Also extends to Indo-China, Siam, Hainan, and South China. A common species. It extends also in a number of subspecies to Malaya, the Philippines, Celebes, and the Lesser Sunda Islands.</p>

<p class="family-heading">Genus <b>BALTIA</b> Moore. (Fig. 109).</p>

<p><i>Baltia</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>b</i>, p. 228 (type, <i>shawi</i> Bates); id., 1904, p. 144 Bingham, 1907, p. 158, fig. 40; Verity, 1907, p, 111; id., 1911, p. 322; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 56; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 65; Klots, 1932, p. 218.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>B. shawi</i> (Bates).</p>

<p><i>Imago</i>.&#x2014;Wings small, fore wing not over 22 mm. long Fore wing: costa strongly arched at base, almost straight to apex, slightly emarginate in the middle, apex blunt; outer margin convex; tornus obtusely angulate, inner margin straight; cell more than half length of wing; veins 1 <i>c</i> and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 on a very long stalk; 6 emitted from the stem of 7+8 and 9 at about mind-way between cell and apex of wing; 5 emitted from near the base of the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>ldc</i> evenly curved, the others absent. Hind wing oval; precostal vein long, at a wide angle, and bent distad near the tip; vein 8 very short; <i>mdc</i> about a third the length of <i>udc</i>; <i>ldc</i> slightly shorter than <i>udc</i>. Antenn{\ae} slender, about half the length of fore wing, club large and abrupt. Palpus with third segment slender, shorter than the second. Head and thorax very hairy. Tarsus without pulvillus and paronychium.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;The high mountains of Turkestan, Mongolia, Tibet, and the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span>, above 13,000 feet. Two species are known, and both occur in the Himalayas.</p>

<p>The butterfly flies near the ground.</p>

<p class="heading"><i>Key to Species</i>.</p>

<p>
  <ol type="a">
    <li>Hind wing underside more or less dusted with black scales... ... ... <i>shawi</i> (Bates), p. 308.</li>
    <li>Hind wing underside not dusted with black, the veins evenly bordered on each side by broad lines of black sclaes... ... ...  <i>butleri</i> (Moore), p. 309.</li>
  </ol>
</p>

<p class="subsection">96. <b>Baltia shawi</b> (Bates).</p>

<p><i>Mesapia shawi</i>, Bates, 1873, p. 305 (Chinese Tartary).</p>

<p><i>Baltia shawi</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>b</i>, p. 228 ({\male}{\female}); id., 1879 <i>b</i>, p. 3, pl. i, fig. 5, {\male}; id., 1904, p. 144, pl. 522, figs. 2. 2 <i>a</i>-2 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 56, t. 23 <i>b</i>; Bingham, 1907, p. 159, fig. 4; Verity, 1907-11, pp. 112, 322, pl. xxvii, figs. 2, 3, pl. xxx, figs. 1, 2; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 65; Klots, 1932, pl. xii, fig. 88 (genitalia).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> dead white; base of wings irrorated with black scales. Fore wing with costal margin very narrowly yellowish; veins 11 and 12 irrorated with black scales; a prominent black spot at end of cell; a narrowly subtriangular, short, oblique, subapical black bar, its apex downwards; and a series of black marginal spots from the apex to vein 1, more prominent at the apex. Hind wing uniform, the irroration of black scales more extended than on the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i>: fore wing white; costa and apex irrorated with black scales; costa and outer margin edged with a line of pinkish-yellow; other markings somewhat as on upperside. Hind wing white with a dull pinkish tinge; the whole surface irrorated with black scales that form a broad elongate patch on posterior half of wing and an obscure curved macular band beyond the cell; a black bar at end of cell.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> somewhat thickly irrorated all over with black scales. Fore wing with the black <i>dc</i> spot and marginal inwardly-pointed triangular black spots as in the {\male}, but the latter more complete and reaching to tornus, the spots larger; no subapical bar, but a complete, outwardly dentate, curved discal black band that crosses the wing from costa to inner margin. Hind wing with very dense black irroration forming a broad posterior patch and curved macular discal band.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the {\male}, but on the fore wing there is a complete marginal series of triangular black spots and a complete, outwardly dentate, curved discal black band; hind wing with the black irroration more dense. In both sexes the antenn{\ae} are white ringed with black; head whitish; thorax and abdomen fuscous-black; beneath: head and thorax fuscous-black, abdomen prominently white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 30-40 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span>, from 15,000 to 18,000 feet; not rare. Also in Turkestan.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Baltia butleri</b> (Moore).</p>

<p>This species much resembles <i>shawi</i> (Bates). Hind wing <i>upperside</i> with two black spots on the <i>dc</i> veins, and on the <i>underside</i> with the veins white edged with black. The black markings less developed than in <i>shawi</i>, and the fore wing is without black marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Turkestan, Mongolia, Tibet, and the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span>. Five subspecies are described, of which two occur in the Himalayas.</p>

<p class="subsection">97 <i>a</i>. <b>Baltia butleri butleri</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Synchloe butleri</i>, Moore, 1882 <i>a</i>, p. 256, pl. ii, figs. 6, 6 <i>a</i>, {\male} (Lahoul).</p>

<p><i>Baltia butleri</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 145, pl. 522, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>, 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 159, fig. 3; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 56, t. 23 <i>b</i>; Verity, 1917, p. 113, pl. xxviii, figs. 4, 5, pl. xxx, fig. 3; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i> p. 65.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i>: fore wing markings smaller and narrower than in <i>shawi</i>, the marginal spots reduced to three or four. Hind wing with two conspicuous black discocellular spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i>: fore wing with ground-color white, veins dusky, costa narrowly and apex suffused with pinkish-ochraceous; discocellular spot as on upperside; veins 4, 5, 6, and the apical portion of 7 broadly bordered on each side with black scales that run parallel to but do not touch the veins. Hind wing ground-colour pinkish-ochraceous, the veins conspicuously white and, except for the <i>dc</i> veins, broadly edged with black scales on each side.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> similar to <i>shawi</i> {\female}, but the wings are irrorated with black scales only at their bases; fore wing markings smaller and narrower, and the discal band diffuse and ill-defined posteriorly. Hind wing with two spots on the dis-cocellular veins, and the discal macular band is more conspicuous than in the {\female} of <i>shawi</i>.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, the fore wing with discal band showing through. In both sexes the antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen as in <i>shawi</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 35-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>, 15000 to 18,000 feet; rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">97 <i>b</i>. <b>Baltia butleri sikkima</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Baltia shawi sikkima</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>b</i> (<i>b</i>), p. 50 (sikkim); Elwes, 1904, p. 390; Verity, 1907, p. 115.</p>

<p><i>Baltia sikkima</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i> p. 231.</p>

<p><i>Baltia butleri sikkima</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 56; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 65.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a complete submarginal band which is continued on the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> more brightly coloured than in <i>b. butleri</i>, the cell yellow; hind wing and apex of fore wing with the veins  yellow, broadly defined by dark brown.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 35-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, 12,000 to 17,000 feet; very rare. The British Museum contains specimens from Tibet, but only one {\male} from Sikkim, taken at Lachen Pok, 17,000 feet, June 1921 (Coll. Evans).</p>

<p class="heading">Genus <b>APORIA</b> H\dd{u}bn.</p>

<p><i>Aporia, H\dd{u}bner</i>, 1819, p. 90 (<i>crat{\ae}gi</i> Linn.); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 40; Bingham, 1907, p. 160, p. 162, fig. 41; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 138; Klots, 1931, p. 201; Dixey, 1932, p. 64,. figs. 433-7 (plume-sclaes); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 63, 67; Hemming 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 124 (type, <i>papilio crat{\ae}gi</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Leuconea</i>, Donzel, 1837, p. 80 (<i>crat{\ae}gi</i>).</p>

<p><i>Pieris</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Schr.), 1904, p. 147.</p>

<p><i>Mesapia</i>, Gray, 1856, p. 92 (type, <i>peloria</i> Hew.). R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 43; Verity, 1907, p. 114.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia</i>, Butler 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 51 (type, <i>agathon</i> Gray); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 41; Klots, 1931, pp. 201, 202 (<i>Aporia</i> subgenus).</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>A. crat{\ae}gi</i> (Linn.). from Europe.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing typically elongate, the inner margin very nearly three-fourths the length of the costa; costa very slightly arched; apex blunt; outer margin convex; inner margin straight; cell elongate, more than half the length of wing; discocellular veins oblique. Veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stalk of 7+8 and 9, about a third from its basal end; 5 from the cell, with <i>mdc</i> varying from half as long to as long as <i>ldc</i>. Hind wing comparatively long, narrow, subpyriform; cell elongate, discocellulars outwardly oblique; precostal vein straight, the tip usually either bent distad or forked. Antenn{\ae} about half the length of fore wing, the club abrupt. Palpi slender subporrect, hairy in front; third segment nearly as long or as long as the second.
</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;Larv{\ae} gregarious on Prunace{\ae}, Rubiace{\ae}, and Berberidace{\ae}, and usually, hibernate when young. Some species make a rustling noise when on the wing, and the flight is somewhat like that of <i>Parnassius</i>.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;The whole Pal{\ae}arctic Region excepting North America, and usually only in high alpine regions. Five species occur in the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span>.</p>

<p class="heading"><i>Key to Species</i>.</p>

<p>
  <ol>
    <li>Wings thinly scaled. Hind wing with vein 8 short, its distal end placed above the origin of vein 6. Palpus very hairy.. .. ..  <i>peloria</i> (Hew.), p. 311.<br />
        Wings more thickly scaled. Hind wing with distal end of vein 8 placed well beyond the origin of vein 6. Palpus much less hairy.. .. .. 2.
    </li>
    <li>Hind wing upperside with pale border, the veins crossing it white or narrowly black. Hind wing underside yellow.. .. .. 3.<br />
        Hind wing upperside with dark border or with marginal vein-spots almost connected.. .. .. 4.
    </li>
    <li>Hind wing upperside usually unmarked, no discal sagittate band.. .. ..  <i>leucodice</i> (Eversm.). p. 312.<br />
        Hind wind wing upperside with a prominent discal band.. .. .. <i>nabellica</i> (Boisd.), p. 314.
    </li>
    <li>Upperside black, with a curved series of post-cellular white spots; submarginal white spots prolonged to double streaks in the {\female}.. .. .. <i>harriet{\ae}</i> de Nic\'ev., p. 316.<br />
      Fore wing upperside with discal area white, the veins broadly darkened, more widely so in the discal area; grading to a dark form with white post-cellular stripes and shorter white submarginal ones.. .. ..  <i>agathon</i> (Gray), p. 317.          
    </li>
  </ol>
</p>

<p class="subsection">98. <b>Aporia peloria</b> (Hewitson).</p>

<p><i>Pieris peloria</i>, Hewitson, 1852-155, <i>Pieris</i> II, figs. 15, 16 (Tibet).</p>

<p><i>Mesapia peloria</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 43 <i>t</i>. 18 <i>a</i>, 19 <i>b</i>; Verity, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 114, pl. xxvi, figs. 2-4.</p>

<p><i>Aporia peloria</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 67.</p>

<p>A small and very distinct species, for which Gray erected the genus <i>Mesapia</i>.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white tinged with yellow, the veins prominently black. Wings rounded. Fore wing transparent in the distal area. Hind wing with vein 8 very short, ending at a point above the origin of vein 6; submarginal spots ill-defined.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing yellow, with very prominent black veins. Palpus and thorax strongly hairy.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing and <i>underside</i> of hind wing yellow. Hind wing <i>upperside</i> yellowish-white, with black marginal wedge-shaped spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 42-44 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span> to the Tibet border, above 13,000 feet; not rare in Western China. Recorded by H. G. Champion (1926, p. 275) as abundant in one or two places in the Girthi Valley, on the Kumaon-Tibet border, at about 13,000 feet. It was usually found frequenting the strips of dense growth of <i>Geranium pratense</i> Linn., which are characteristic of the inner valleys.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Aporia leucodice</b> (Eversmann).</p>

<p>A very variable species, composing five subspecies, of which three are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white without any dark suffusion. Fore wing with a submarginal band and a discocellular mark which varies in size; the <i>udc</i> 5 to 6 not angled. Hind wing usually without a sagittate discal band. A pale marginal border, with the veins crossing it white or narrowly black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> yellow, with or without a sagittate discal line.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Persia and Turkestan to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; common. Three subspecies can be distinguished in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">99 <i>a</i>. <b>Aporia leucodice balucha</b> Marshall.</p>

<p><i>Aporia balucha</i>, Marshall, 1882 <i>b</i>. p. 760; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>b</i>, p. 342; Bingham, 1907, p. 162.</p>

<p><i>Aporia leucodice balucha</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 138; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 199.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia sorex</i>, Grose-Smith, 1887 <i>a</i>, p. 129; Smith &amp; Kirby, 1889, <i>Pieris</i> II, figs. 8, 9.</p>

<p><i>Pieris leechi</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 150.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia leechi</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 42 t. 19 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Distinguished from the nominotypical form by the broader black bands on both wings and the darker yellow underside of the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a complete post-discal band, and with the veins in the distal and apical area mostly black, the black scaling widened at the margin. Black discocellular spot of variable size, wider in the {\female}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with apical area darker yellow than in <i>soracta</i> Moore, the veins more broadly edged with black; a post-discal black band. Hind wing darker yellow than in <i>soracta</i>, with broader black edging to the veins and a prominent sagittate discal band.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 40-50 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span>, 8,000-10,000 feet; not rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">99 <i>b</i>. <b>Aporia leucodice soracta</b> Moore. (Fig. 110, imago).</p>

<p><i>Aporia soracta</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 83 (N. W. India); id., 1882, p. 256, pl. ii, fig. 5 (larva); id., 1904, p. 148, pl. 523, fig. 1 (larva, pupa), figs. 1 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}). 1 <i>e</i>, <i>f</i> ({\female}); Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 135; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 589; Verity, 1907, p. 126, pl. xxvi, fig. 20, pl. xxvii, figs. 23, 24; Frustorfer, 1910, p. 138.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia soracta</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 41, t. 18 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Aporia leucodice soracta</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68. pl. vii, B 2, {\male}; Peile, 1937, p. 47, pl. v, fig. 33 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Aporia soracta denigrata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 138 (Punjab).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A large race which varies much in the extent of the black markings. <i>Upperside</i> milk-white, the veins of both wings black. Fore wing with a post-discal band which is usually obsolete in area 3; a heavy discocellular bar; a thin marginal black line from base of costa to base of inner margin, more or less interrupted at the middle of inner margin; base slightly dusted with black. Hind wing unmarked except for a marginal black line as on fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, the apex and costal edge pale yellow, black markings as on  upperside. Hind wing pale yellow, the precostal area chrome-yellow, the discocellulars somewhat prominently defined with black; area 2 divided longitudinally by a black line; discal band often absent. Cilia of both wings dusky brown. Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen white, generally strongly suffused with fuscous-black, beneath white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: <i>{\male}</i> <i>{\female}</i>, 50-70 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>denigrata</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;Fore wing a most unmarked, or with weak black lines.</p>

<p>A melanic aberration of the {\male} is in the British Museum (ex Coll. Evans) from Mussooree. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with heavy black suffusion over the distal area; on the <i>underside</i> this suffusion is more concentrated over the discal area. The post-discal line is very heavy.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Brown, with fine soft hairs. On <i>Berberis lycium</i> Royle, family Berberidace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;White, dotted with black; head-process obtuse; a thoracic and abdominal protuberance.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;According to Peile (1937) the butterfly frequents the flowers of horse-chestnut. It was found to be abundant at Mussooree at 5,000 to 6,000 feet in May and June, but was absent at 3,000 feet.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">United Provinces</span>, Mussooree; common.</p>

<p class="subsection">99 <i>c</i>. <b>Aporia leucodice sara</b> Evans.</p>

<p><i>Aporia leucodice sara</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68 (Kumaon).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the post-discal band heavier and the spots in areas 2 and 4 much larger than in nearly all specimens of <i>soracta</i> Moore. Hind wing with a black post-discal sagittate line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> more like <i>soracta</i>; the fore wing with post-discal spots in 2 and 4 more strongly developed; hind wing with veins more heavily blackened, and the post-discal sagittate line more marked than in most <i>soracta</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; common.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Aporia nabellica</b>(Boisduval).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A very distinct species. <i>Upperside</i> usually darkened, the fore wing at least with the cell darkened on both sides. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing a pale marginal border, the veins crossing it white or nearly black; a prominent sagittate discal band. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing dark yellow, wiht discal band as on upperside.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span> to <span class="smallscaps">Kumaon</span>, in two subspecies: both rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">100 <i>a</i> <b>Aporia nabellica hesba</b> Evans.</p>

<p><i>Aporia nabellica hesba</i>, Evans, 1912 <i>a</i>, pp. 559, 976 (Chitral); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68, pl. vii, B 5.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> bright lemon-yellow. Fore wing with cell suffused with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with cell partly suffused with black; a heavy black discocellular bar and post-discal band.</p>

<p>{\female}. White or pale yellow, without black suffusion.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span>, at 9,000 feet; very rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">100 <i>b</i> <b>Aporia nabellica nabellica</b> (Boisduval). (Fig. 111, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris nabellica</i>, Boisduval, 1936, p. 509.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia nabellica</i>, Butler, 1872, p. 61; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 42, t. 19 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Aporia nabellica</i>, Mackinnom &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 589; Bing-ham, 1907, p. 163.</p>

<p><i>Pieris nabellica</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 151, pl. 524, figs. 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Aporia nabellica</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 138.</p>

<p><i>Aporia nabellica nabellica</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68</p>

<p><i>Aporia nabellica ferrari</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 252 (Dalhousie).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with pale yellow ground-colour, suffused with black for the greater part. Fore wing with a submarginal series of more or less rectangular spots; a large ill-defined black discocellular patch; some anterior post-discal elongate greyish spots. Hind wing with prominent sagittate discal band.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white, the veins on both wings very broadly black-edged. Fore wing apex slightly yellow; posterior area sometimes clouded with black; post-discal black band as on upperside, but broader. Hind wing dark yellow; broad sagittate band as on upperside; base of costa chrome-yellow. Antenn{\ae} black, apex of club ochraceous; head and thorax clothed with fine dusky greyish-black hairs; abdomen black above, beneath greyish-white.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. White or nearly so, and densely suffused with black scales as far as the discal band on both wings, leaving only a pale marginal and post-cellular area.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-65 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>ferrari</b> Tytler.&#x2014;This name is applied to very pale specimens of both sexes with reduced black markings. Described from specimens taken at Dalhousie, Dugi Pass, and Valossa.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;Flies slowly and heavily, and frequents Umbel-lifer{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>, 9,000-13,000 feet; rare.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Aporia harriet{\ae}</b> (de Nic\'eville).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black with white markings. Both wings with a cell-stripe. Fore wing with a prominent row of five post-cellular sports, and hind wing with a similar row of smaller spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with a prominent chrome-yellow spot at the base of the costa.</p>

<p>A large and uncommon species comprising three subspecies, of which only the nominotypical race occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span> and Yunnan to South-East Tibet and Western China.</p>

<p class="subsection">100. <b>Aporia harriet{\ae} harriet{\ae}</b> (de Nic\'eville).</p>

<p><i>Metaporia harriet{\ae}</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1892 <i>a</i>, p. 341, pl. i, figs. 3 ({\male}), 4 {\female} (Bhutan).</p>

<p><i>Pieris harriet{\ae}</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 152, pl. 524, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Aporia harriet{\ae}</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 166; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68.</p>

<p><i>Aporia harriet{\ae} harriet{\ae}</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 139.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with a thin white basal costal streak; cell with a large creamy-white patch occupying its basal three-fourths; a large patch occupying the basal two-thirds of area 1 <i>b</i>; a post-cellular curved series of prominent white spots, of which the posterior one, in area 2, is the largest and occupies the base of the area; a series of diffuse submarginal white spots between the veins, in the {\female} elongated into double streaks. Hind wing in the basal half with the veins white, broadly margined on both sides with black; cell almost entirely creamy-white; post-cellular markings consisting of a very narrow constal and a very narrow constal and a wide subcostal streak, followed by five spots, one in each area, that in area 3 the smallest; two clongate streaks in area 1; two basal white streaks occupying the whole of areas 1 <i>a</i> and <i>b</i>; marginal diffuse spots as on the fore wing, but each spot divided by the black internervular fold.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing differs from the upperside only in having a marginal series of double white streaks in each area from the costa to vein 3 decreasing in size posteriorly. Hind wing with base of costa bright yellow; markings as on upperside, but pale yellow, and a pair of elongate, wedge-shaped, pale yellow streaks in each area, each streak with pointed apex, its base broad and on the margin; in area 7 a distally pointed stripe. Cilia black. {\female} with paler markings.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 70-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>; very rare.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Aporia agathon</b> (Gray).</p>

<p>A species of large size, with three subspecies in the Indian area. The most easterly race is the nominotypical one, with a striped pattern strongly resembling certain Danaid{\ae}, and is the darkest form. The most westerly race is the lightest form, whilst between these occur two races with markings of an intermediate kind. At one time these were regarded as distinct species, and later as individual forms of one species, whilst recently Evans has treated them as races.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black, with white or dusky discal and submarginal stripes which are sometimes connected to form a single row. Cell of the hind wing white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar, the hind wing at base of costa bright yellow.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i> (<i>caphusa</i> Moore).&#x2014;Gregarious, pupating under the dry leaves at the foot of their food-plant, the pup{\ae} being also gregarious. The larv{\ae} spin a joint web, and lie together in communities of then or more. They feed only at night. Colour when full grown dirty brown, head black, each segment with a dorsal longitudinal dark brown stripe; body covered with weak white hairs. Just before pupation the colour turns to a light green, with the head and stripes as before (from <i>Mackinnon</i>, 1898).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Very similar in shape to that of <i>A. l. soracta</i>; greenish-yellow with black markings (from <i>Mackinnon</i>, 1898).</p>

<p><i>Food-plant</i>.&#x2014;<i>Berberis nepalensis</i> Spring.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span>Himalayas</span> and Yunnan to Tibet and Formosa. Four subspecies can be distinguished in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">102 <i>a</i>. <b>Aporia agathon phryxe</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p><i>Pieris phryxe</i>, Boiduval, 1836, p. 446.</p>

<p><i>Aporia phryxe</i>, Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 589.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia phryxe</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 154, pl. 525, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> (\female); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 42, t, 19 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon</i> var. <i>phryxe</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 166.</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon phryxe</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 139; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68; Peile, 1937, p. 48, pl. vi, fig. 43 (imago).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The white areas predominate, the black ground forming stripes more markedly on veins 2 to 4 of the fore wing and on 2 to 6 of the hind wing, expanding at the margin, the outer margin of both wings being black. Fore wing with a heavy black discocellular bar.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar; hind wing with the white stripes more constricted at the middle.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female},  80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span>; not rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">102 <i>b</i>. <b>Aporia agathon caphusa</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Metaporia caphusa</i>, Moore, 1872, p. 564; id., 1904, p. 155, pl. 525, figs. 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}), <i>c</i> ({\female}); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Aporia caphusa</i>, Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 589, pl. v. figs. 20 <i>a</i>-<i>c</i> (larva, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon</i> var. <i>caphusa</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 165.</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon phryxe</i> f. <i>caphusa</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 139.</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon caphusa</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68, pl. vii, fig. B 5.5 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 48.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The black ground-colour is more developed than in <i>phryxe</i> (Boisd.), the black stripes being mostly broader than the white ones. The anterior white stripes on both wings are not continuous, and the posterior ones are almost divided by black scaling, though they are sometimes continuous; the white stripe on the inner margin of both wings shows no trace of a black dividing-line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar; fore wing subapical spots and those of the hind wing faintly yellow.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">United Provinces</span>, Mussooree; not rare, sometimes abundant.</p>

<p class="subsection">102 <i>c</i> <b>Aporia agathon ariaca</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Metaporia ariaca</i>, Moore, (1872), p. 564; id., 1904, p. 156, pl. 526, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Aporia ariaca</i>, Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 590.</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon phryxe</i> f. <i>ariaca</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 139.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A light form, somewhat resembling <i>caphusa</i> (Moore), but the cell of the fore wing is dusted with black and all the markings are reduced, especially on the hind wing. Connects <i>caphusa</i> with <i>a. agathon</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; known chiefly from Naini Tal. Not common.</p>

<p class="subsection">102 <i>d</i>. <b>Aporia agathon agathon</b> (Gray). (Fig. 112, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris agathon</i>, Gray, 1831, p. 33 (Nepal); id., 1846, p. 8, pl. 8, fig. 1.</p>

<p><i>Metaporia agathon</i>, Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 51, pl. fig. 10; Moore, 1904, p. 156, pl. 526, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Klots, 1932, pl. x, fig. 63 (genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon</i>, Elwes, 1888, p. 415; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 309; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 590; Bingham, 1907, pp. 163-5, fig. 42.</p>

<p><i>Aporia agathon agathon</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 139; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 68.</p>
 
<p>{\male}{\female}. The darkest race. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a broad cell-stripe; in area 1 two or more confluent streaks obscurely divided by a diffuse blackish line; a post-discal series of five short lines in areas 3, 4, 5, and 10; a submarginal series of elongate narrow spots; both the submarginal and post-discal series are curved inwards anteriorly. In most specimens the streaks in area 1 and the cell-stripe are dusted with black. Hind wing with a broad streak on the inner margin divided by vein 1 <i>a</i>; two narrow long streaks in area 1 <i>c</i>; a much broader, elongate, oval cell-stripe, with another elongate braod streak above it in area 7; a post-discal series of five narrow elongate spots, followed by a submarginal series of more or less oval spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar, the markings more sharply defined, and on the fore wing generally broader and whiter, except that the anterior one or two streaks or spots of both series, like all the markings of the hind wing, are strongly suffused with bright yellow. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; abdomen beneath white, the anterior legs with one or two white spots.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span>; rare, especially the {\female}.</p>

<p class="heading">Genus <b>DELIAS</b> H\dd{u}bner. (Fig. 113, venation).</p>

<p><i>Delias</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 91; Butler, 1872, p. 26; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 139; Mitis, 1893, p. 97; Butler, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 143; Moore, 1904, p. 163; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 43; Bingham, 1907, p. 139; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 123; Talbot, 1928 <i>a</i>, pp. 1-56, id., 1929 <i>a</i>, pp. 57-116, id., 1929 <i>b</i>, pp. 117-67, id., 1929 <i>c</i>, pp. 168-219; id., 1930 <i>a</i>, pp. 220-59; Klots, 1931, p. 204; Talbot, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73; Dixey, 1932, p. 61; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 63 68,; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 124 (type. <i>tyche</i> H\dd{u}bn., 1823 = egialea Cram., 1777); Talbot. 1935, p. 627; id., 1937, pp. 261-656; Peile, 1937 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Symmachlas</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819-27, pl. 122 (<i>nigrina</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Cath{\ae}mia</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 92; Scudder, 1875, p. 136 (type, <i>c{\ae}neus</i> Linn.); Klots, 1931, p. 204; Talbot, 1931, p. 229; id., 1932, p. 114; id., 1935, p. 628.</p>

<p><i>Thyca</i>, Wallengren, 1859, p. 76; Scudder, 1875, p. 282 (type <i>aganippe</i> Don.); Wallace, 1867, p. 344.</p>

<p><i>Piccarda</i>, Grote, 1900, p. 32 (<i>eucharis</i> Drury); Moore, 1904, p. 175; Talbot, 1928 <i>a</i>, pp. 2, 34.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>D. egialea</i> (Cramer), from Java.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing: costa nearly straight, very slightly arched; apex very broadly rounded; outer margin oblique; tornus obtusely rounded; inner margin straight; cell about half length of wing; vein 11 from the cell; 10 absent; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>udc</i> absent, <i>mdc</i> usually shorter than <i>ldc</i>; 5 from near upper angle of cell; 2, 3, and 4 well separated. Hind wing: cell a regular oval, slightly over half length of wing; precostal vein long, directed distad; vein 8 reaching to before the middle of the costa; 7 from the cell, reaching the apex of wing; 5 nearer to 6 than to 4; 2 farther from 3 than 3 is from 4. Antenn{\ae} about half length of fore wing, club abrupt. Palpi short, third segment slender, as long as or longer than the second.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;{\female}. These organs are of quite simple construction. The <i>valve</i> is triangular and of variable size, and exhibits much specific variation. Many species possess a curious structure in the middle basal region of the valve. This consists of a rounded hole or groove in the membranous lining, and close to it on the membrane at one side is a short flap or tubercle which is directed towards the groove and sometimes overlays it. The size of the hole and the shape of the flap vary in different species, and many species are quite without this organ. The <i>uncus</i> is formed of three lobes in most species, but in a few only one lobe is present. This organ differs with every species, and sometimes a subspecific difference can be seen. In the determination of species which present close pattern similarities the uncus is infallible (cf. <i>belladonna</i> group).</p>

<p>{\female.} In common with many other genera of Pierid{\ae} the bursal sac bears a sclerotized plate called the <i>lamina dentata</i>. In <i>Delias</i> this plate is found near the lower or larger end of the sac. It is usually long and narrow, with a median constriction, and the armature of teeth is confined to the distal lobes. The form of the plate and its dentition are different in each species. A distinctive form is found in the <i>belladonna</i> and <i>hyparete</i> groups. In the former it is very large and somewhat square, the distal edge of the lobes very slightly rounded, and the armature sparse. In the latter group the plate is very large, with broad and well-rounded lobes.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scales.</i>&#x2014;These scales are found on the fore wing of all species, and are sometimes very abundant. They exhibit considerable variation which is of specific value. Four types of scent-scale are found in <i>Delias</i>: (1) flask-shaped, with a large disc; (2) flask-shaped, with a small disc; (3) flask-shaped, with a large disc and a rather broad neck; (4) long and narrow, the neck rapidly tapering.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Differs from the larv{\ae} of other Pierin{\ae} in the possession of tufts of long hair which may form either a dorsal and two lateral rows or only a dorsal row.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Stout; head-process short or long, bifid or simple. Often three rows of spines corresponding to the larval hairs.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>&#x2014;The larv{\ae} feed on species of mistletoe (<i>Loranthus</i>). They are gregarious on the underside of a leaf. They early stages of only a few species are known. The butterfly frequents grassy country and open woodland from 2,500 to 8,000 feet, rarely to 10,000 feet. It haunts flowering trees and shrubs, the male often abundant, but the female remaining at the tree-tops most of the time. The flight is slow and weak.</p>

<p><i>Mimicry</i>.&#x2014;All the species have the hind wing more or less brightly coloured on the underside, and in some cases there is also a striking colour on the upperside of the fore wing or on both wings. These patterns are probably all examples of warning coloration. A number of species are mimicked by other Pierid{\ae}, one by a Satyrid (<i>Elymnias</i>), and others by Nymphalids (<i>Mynes</i>). In India some species of the <i>bella-donna</i> group are closely resembled by <i>Prioneris thestylis</i> (Doubl.), and <i>Prioneris sita</i> (Feld.) is an excellent mimic of <i>Delias eucharis</i> (Drury).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Central and Southern China, Formosa, Hainan, Tibet, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, South and East Australia, New Guinea, and the Solomons. No species has been found on the Key Islands, where the food-plant appears to be absent.</p>

<p>The genus contains 157 species so far recorded, and reaches its greatest development in New Guinea, where 67 species are known to occur, and where many more are likely to be discovered.</p>

<p>In the Indian area there are thirteen species comprising twenty-four subspecies.</p>

<p class="heading"><i>Key to Species of</i> Delias.</p>

<table>
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside without red markings.<br />
      Hind wing underside with red markings...
    </td>
    <td>
      2.<br />
      10.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside with a dark border bearing large white or yellow spots..<br />
      Hind wing underside with black ground-colour, and with yellow and white spots and stripes.. ... .. ...<br />
      Hind wing underside yellow, with a narrow black border bearing small linear white spots. .. .. ... ..<br />
    </td>
    <td>
      3.<br />
      4.<br />
      [p. 350. <i>agostina</i> (Hew.),<br />
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside with the veins not darkened... .. ..<br />
      Hind wing underside with the veins black.
    </td>
    <td>
      [p. 323. <i>agoranis</i> Gr.-Sm.,<br />
      <i>singhapura</i> (Wall.), 
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing upperside without a yellow costal patch or with only vestiges of a yellow spot.<br />
      Hind wing upperside with a basal yellow costal patch. ... ...... 
    </td>
    <td>
      [p. 324. <i>patrua</i> Leech, p. 326.<br />
      5.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside with cell-stripe entirely yellow.. ..<br />
      Hind wing underside with cell-stripe white at its proximal end...  .
    </td>
    <td>
      [p. 338. <i>belladonna</i> (Fabr.).<br />
      6.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing upperside with a long, narrow, sharply-defined white cell-stripe, and with small marginal spots.. ... ..<br />
      Hind wing upperside with cell-stripe not long and narrow, only sharply defined in the {\female}; large, rounded, marginal spots.. .. .
    </td>
    <td>
      [p. 327. <i>lativitta</i> Leech,<br />
      7.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>7.</td>
    <td style="width: 70%;">
      Hind wing upperside with the discal stripe in area 4 short and broad, its proximal edge emarginate or straight, and as broad as the area. {\female} wiht extended white markings. Uncus with middle lobe shorter than the lateral ones. .. ... ..<br />
         Hind wing upperside with the discal stripe in area 4 short and narrow, not as broad as the area, its proximal edge sharply defined on underside, never emarginate.. . 
    </td>
    <td>
      [(Moore), p. 330 <i>sanaca sanaca</i><br />
      [9. 332. <i>sanaca oreas</i> Talb.,<br />
      8.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>8.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside with the white stripe in area 1 <i>c</i> below vein 2 always present and produced proximally of the stripe in 2. Uncus with middle lobe shorter than lateral ones. {\female} with broad white cell-stripe and white discal patches... ... .<br />
      Hind wing underside with the white stripe in area 1 <i>c</i>, when present, not produced proximally of the stripe in 2. Uncus broad, lateral lobes rounded. .. ..
    </td>
    <td>
      [Fruhst., p. 333. <i>sanaca perspicua</i><br />
      9.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside with the white stripe in area 1 <i>c</i> prominent and proximally defined; submedian fold along lower edge of stripe rarely black, but yellow. Uncus with middle lobe longer than lateral ones. {\female} resembles <i>perspicua</i> {\female}. ... ..<br />
      Hind wing underside with white stripe in area 1 <i>c</i> minute or absent, and no yellow anal patch. Uncus with middle lobe longer than lateral ones.. ... ..
    </td>
    <td>
      [Butl., 9.336. <i>berinda boylel{\ae}</i><br />
      [p. 337. <i>b. berinda</i> (Moore),
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing underside with a red subbasal band from costa or vein 8 to inner margin.<br />
      Hind wing underside with a broad red subcostal stripe in area 7. ... .<br />
      Hind wing underside with a submarginal band of red spots; veins black.. ...
    </td>
    <td>
      11.<br />
      [p. 347 <i>descombesi</i> (Boisd.),<br />
      12.
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>11.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing upperside without a red patch...<br />
      Hind wing upperside with a red basal patch reaching well below the cell... ..
    </td>
    <td>
      <i>aglaia</i> (Linn.), p. 342<br />
      [p/ 345. <i>thysbe</i> (Cram.),
    </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>12.</td>
    <td>
      Upperside with a submarginal black line...<br />
      Upperside without a submarginal black line
    </td>
    <td>
      <i>eucharis</i> (Drury), [p. 352.<br />
      <i>hyparete</i> (Linn.), [p. 356.
    </td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="subsection">103. <b>Delias agoranis</b> Grose-Smith.</p>

<p><i>Delias agoranis</i>, Grose-Smith, 1887 <i>a</i> (b), p. 266, {\male} (Burma, Siamese frontier); Smith &amp; Kirby, 1889, <i>Delias</i> I, figs. 7, 8 (\male); Adamson, 1808, p. 117; Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, p. 89, pl. xxxvii, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Delias agostina agoranis</i>, Bingham, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 147.</p>

<p><i>Delias singhapura agoranis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 124.</p>

<p><i>Piccarda agoranis</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 182, pl. 535, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing: cosota broadly greyish-black, and some dusting of the same colour beyond the end of the cell; outer margin broadly black, narrowing to vein 2, below which it is prolonged as a thin submarginal line to vein 1 <i>a</i>; a series of small white submarginal spots, those in areas 4 to 6 larger than the others. Hind wing: a series of marginal triangular black spots at the ends of the veins, those on veins 2 and 3 much larger than the others.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the veins broadly black, the costal border black, and black apical and marginal area, within which the submarginal spots and three short subapical stripes are clearly defined. Hind wing pale lemon-yellow; outer margin with a broad black border bearing six prominent white spots placed near the margin, the two anterior spots tinged with yellow; the veins blackened distally.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing brownish-black, with the cell and a streak between the veins dusky white. Hind wing white with the outer margin bordered with brownish-black, and with submarginal greyish-white interspaces.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the veins more broadly black than in the {\male}. Hind wing as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, about 78 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern Burma</span>; also taken in Siam. Very rare; only a few specimens in collections.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias singhapura</b> (Wallace).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. This species is distinguished from the allied <i>agoranis</i> by the prominent black veins of the hind wing underside. Fore wing upperside with the black apical are extended to the cell.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Islands</span>, Malay Peninsula, Siam, Sumatra, and Borneo. Three subspecies are distinguished.</p>

<p class="subsection">104. <b>Delias singhapura singhapura</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 114, genitalia; fig. 115, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Thyca singhapura</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 353, pl. vii, fig. 2 ({\male}) (Singapore).</p>

<p><i>Delias singhapura</i>, Distant, 1885, p. 293, fig. 100 (\male).</p>

<p><i>Delias singhapura singhapura</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 124; Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, p. 91, pl. xxxvii, fig. 2 ({\male}); id., 1937, pl. vii, fig. 1 (valve), pl. xviii, fig. 1 (scent-scale).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with the veins black for the greater part; a blackish apical area which reaches the cell. Hind wing with the veins blackened distally; a narrow blackish marginal border from anal angle to area 3, and small dark marginal marks on veins 3 to 5.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, the veins blackened, especially in the apical area; apex black, either narrowly or not extending more than half the distance between apex and cell; in lighter specimens a narrow submarginal black line marks off the submarginal spots, which are better defined in darker specimens; there are six submarginal spots, somewhat ovate, and twice as large in some specimens than in others. Hind wing bright yellow, with the veins and costal edge black; a black marginal border from 5 to 7 mm. wide, slightly extended on the veins; a series of six submarginal spots, the posterior four greyish-white and incurved proximally, the anterior two yellow.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> creamy-white. Fore wing with distal broad brownish-black area, with diffuse inner edge; proximal area dusted with black; submarginal pale indistinct marks, the double tornal spot more distinct. Hind wing without black dusting; marginal dark border winder than in the {\male} and more produced on the veins, and with greyish edging much more extensive than in the {\male}.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 66 mm.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i> (fig. 6 <i>a</i>, p. 14.)&#x2014;Long and strongly tapering, the disc small.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 114).&#x2014;Valve: distal edge with a short obtuse process; dorsal edge nearly straight but strongly excurved posteriorly; ventral fold well developed; cavity large. uncus very broad; middle lobe short, narrow and rounded; lateral lobes longer, broad and rounded.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Islands</span>, extending to Singapore and Siam.</p>

<p>This subspecies is very rare, and only a few specimens are in collections. The species is quite common in Borneo.</p>

<p>There are two females in the British Museum, one from Peninsular Siam (Renong) and one from Perak.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias Patrua</b> Leech. (Fig. 116, genitalia).</p>

<p>This species is distinguished by the absence of a yellow costal patch on the hind wing upperside, by the prominent yellow inner marginal border of the hind wing, and by the narrow suffused cell-stripe and thin discal stripes on both wings.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i>.&#x2014;Long and tapering, with a small disc.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 116).&#x2014;Valve: apex produced to a relatively long triangular process directed distad; dorsal edge posteriorly, well rounded; ventral edge incurved anteriorly; ventral fold strongly developed; cavity and flap large. Uncus: lobes of about equal length, lateral ones well separated from the middle one, broad and inflexed; tegumen strongly incurved.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Central and Western China to Yunnan and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>. Two subspecies.</p>

<p class="subsection">105. <b>Delias patrua shan</b> Talbot. (Fig. 117, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Delias patrua shan</i>, Talbot, 1937, p. 266 ({\male}) (Shan States).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> smoky black. Fore wing with greyish-white stripes and spots, the distal stripes in areas 2 and 3 thicker than the others; six small submarginal spots, the anterior two in 5 and 6 are linear and joined to the discal stripes; tornal spot double, placed on the edge of a grey marginal spot which usually forms a short extension to the inner margin. Hind wing with some yellow scaling at the base of the costa; cell-stripe more distinct than on the fore wing; discal stripes narrow and distinct, the one in area 4 usually thicker than the others; grey submarginal spots of moderate size; those in 2 and 3 larger than the others; costal edge grey; areas 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i> entirely yellow, and the part of 1 <i>c</i> below the submedian fold is yellow for its distal half or third.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with paler ground-colour and more distinct stripes; submarginal spots in areas 5 and 6 yellow, and there is a yellow streak in 8, interrupted in the middle; cell-stripe continuous, without a separate distal spot. Hind wing with a basal costal yellow stripe filling area 8, extending over most of 7, but not touching the cell; the lower edge of this patch is scaled with white; cell-stripe yellow, white proximally; discal stripes in areas 2 to 6 yellow, mostly white-edged; discal spot in 6 rather small; the yellow stripe in 1 <i>c</i> extends to the margin and includes the inner one of the double submarginal spots; an ill-defined white stripe in 1 <i>c</i>; submarginal spots somewhat rounded, prominent and yellow.</p> 

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 86-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span>, 5,000 to 6,000 feet, in May; rare.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias lativitta</b> Leech. (Fig. 118, genitalia).</p>

<p>The species is easily recognized by the white cell-stripe on the hind wing; this stripe is long, sharply defined, and prominent, but in the {\female} sometimes dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i>.&#x2014;Longer than the of <i>patrua</i>, but otherwise very similar.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 118).&#x2014;Valve: apex not produced; ventral fold not strongly developed; cavity and flap nearly as in <i>patrua</i>. Uncus: somewhat like that of <i>patrua</i>, but middle lobe longer than the others.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;What and South-west China to Formosa, Yunnan, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>. Four subspecies. Common in China, but the {\female} is always rare.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p class="subsection">106. <b>Delias lativitta parva</b> Talbot. (Fig. 119, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Delias lativitta parva</i>, Talbot, 1937, p. 268 ({\male}) (Bhutan).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with white and grey-white stripes and spots as in <i>patrua</i> Leech, but more prominent. The stripes are narrower and the submarginal spots smaller than in the nominotypical form. Fore wing the a long and well-marked though slightly dusky cell-stripe; discal stripes in areas 4 to 6 usually connected with the submarginal spots; fringe purer white than in <i>patrua</i>. Hind wing with white and prominent cell-stripe; discal stripe in 4 longer than the others and proximally pointed; submarginal spots bordered distally with grey, especially those in 2 and 3, and tornal area with extended grey scaling; inner area proximally white or yellowish-white, distally yellow; this yellow area extends usually to vein 2 or at least to beyond the submedian fold.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the upperside, the markings lighter; the inner yellow area on hind wing tends to become reduced proximally.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 82 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>, 6,500 feet; <span class="smallcaps">North-East Burma</span>, 5,000-8,000 feet; <span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span>, 5,000 feet. Rare, only 3 {\male}{\male} in the British Museum; {\female} unknown.</p>

<p>This race is only slightly differentiated from the nomino typical one.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias sanaca</b> (Moore). (Fig. 120, genitalia).</p>

<p>This species differs from <i>lativitta</i> Leech in the broader or more diffuse cell-stripe of the hind wing, in the larger marginal spots, and in the shape of the stripe in area 4 of the hind wing. One form of <i>sanaca</i> is very like a form of <i>berinda</i> (Moore). In the more typical examples of <i>sanaca</i> the stripe in 4 of the hind wing is short and broad, with its proximal edge emarginate or straight. This character will not be very helpful in determining specimens from Burma, where the race <i>perspicua</i> Fruhst. is confusingly similar to <i>D. berinda boyle{\ae}</i> Butl. Specimens of the latter are lighter, especially on the hind wing, and the white stripe in area 1 <i>c</i> on the underside is not produced proximally of the stripe in 2. It is advisable to examine the uncus to be certain. The {\female} of <i>sanaca</i> has a prominent white cell-stripe on the hind wing upperside, and the other markings some what resemble those of the {\male}. In Burma specimens it is often difficult to know whether a given {\female} belongs to <i>sanaca</i> or to <i>berinda</i>. Examine the spots in areas 2 and 3 of the hind wing underside. In specimens of <i>sanaca</i> the distance between the distal edge of these spots and the inner edge of the submarginal spots opposite them is not greater than 4 mm. In specimens of <i>berinda</i> the distance mentioned is greater than 4 mm.
</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i>.&#x2014;Flask-shaped, posteriorly broad and rounded, sharply tapering anteriorly.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.&#x2014;Valve: similar to that of <i>lativitta</i>, the ventral edge slightly and more evenly curved, and the ventral fold much more developed; cavity large, with small flap. </p>

<p>Uncus: middle lobe always shorter than the lateral ones, which are curved.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-West India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Bhutan, Northern Burma</span>, Yunnan, and Tong-king. Four sub-species.</p>

<p class="subsection">107 <i>a</i>. <b>Delias sanaca sanaca</b> (Moore). (Fig. 121, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris sanaca</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 49 (West Himalaya); id., 1857 <i>b</i>, p. 103, pl. 44, fig. 4 (err. 6) (\female).</p>

<p><i>Thyca sanaca</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 348 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca</i>, Elwes, 1886, p. 159; de Nic\'eville, 1889 <i>c</i>, p. 343; Moore, 1904, p. 163, pl. 528, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i>, <i>e</i> ({\female}); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 44; Evans, 1912 <i>a</i>, p. 975.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna sanaca</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 130.</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca sanaca</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 282; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70; Talbot, 1937, p. 272, pl. xlv, fig. 2 ({\male}), pl. xxvii, figs. 83, 85 (scent-scale), pl. xiii, fig. 81 (valve); Peile, 1937, p. 51, pl. vi, fig. 37 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca</i> var. <i>flavalba</i>, Marshall, 1882 <i>b</i>, p. 759 (Kunawar).</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i> var. <i>flavalba</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 149.</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca</i> f. <i>flavalba</i>, Talbot, 1937, p. 274, pl. xliv, fig. 1 {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca</i> f. <i>confusa</i>, Talbot, 1928 <i>b</i> (<i>b</i>), p. 224 ({\male}) (North-West India); id., 1937, p. 2741, pl. xliv, fig. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with well-developed white markings. Fore wing submarginal spots large and triangular; submedian stripe broad and very distinct. Hind wing with broad white cell-stripe, pointed proximally and distally, sometimes dusky in the basal half; discal patches forming a broad band which narrows anteriorly, and posteriorly is often merged with the submarginal spots; submarginal spots in areas 2 to 6 large and, excepting the anterior one, somewhat rounded; inner area pale yellow for the distal half or less, the proximal half white, only slightly darkened at the base.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with white markings strongly developed. Hind wing with the yellow discal spots edged prominently with white; patch in area 1 <i>c</i> below vein 2 entirely white; yellow anal spot never entirely separated from inner yellow area; fold in area 1 <i>c</i> not, or only weakly, scaled with black distally.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour paler brown than in the {\male}, fore wing markings yellowish, hind wing with white markings. Fore wing discal patches larger than in the ${\male}$, the spots beyond the cell sharply defined, that in area 4 proximally incurved. Hind wing the more extended white markings than in the {\male}; inner area distally yellowish-white, only distinctly yellow along the fold in 1 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with white and yellow markings more extended than in the {\male}; fore wing with submarginal spots very large. Fringes black in both sexes.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 69-94 mm.; {\female}, 84-96 mm.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.&#x2014;The normal form described above lies mid-way in a series leading to a very light form on the one side and to a very dark one on the other.</p>

<p>Form <b>flavalba</b> Marsh.&#x2014;The lightest form. Fore wing with the cell almost white; inner area between the margin and vein 2 almost entirely white, but sometimes with an indistinct black submedian stripe; discal spots large, sometimes merged with the submarginal ones and forming broad or narrow stripes. Hind wing white or with a black stripe along lower margin of cell; submarginal spots sometimes so entirely merged with the discal area that there is even no dark submarginal line.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing yellowish-white, the proximal half only dusky on the veins. Hind wing as in the {\male}.</p>

<p>Form <b>confusa</b> Talb.&#x2014;Closely resembles <i>D. belladonna horsfieldi</i> Gray. Distinguished from the nominotypical form by the black ground-colour occupying a greater area than the with colour, so that the white discal stripes and spots are much smaller on the upperside, and to a less extent reduced on the underside.</p>

<p>{\female}. Lighter than the {\male} but darker than in the nominotypical form. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with reduced discal white patches, that in area 4 especially short; prominent black areas between the cell-patch and discal band, and between the discal band and submarginal spots.</p>

<p>The above is the first record of the {\female} of this form, and is made from a transfer recently presented to the British Museum by Lieut.-Colonel H. D. Peile, who found the insect dead on the ground at Mussooree, 5,500 feet, 1916, about May.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-West India</span>: common at Mussooree from April to June at about 5,000 feet; also known from Garhwal, and may be said to range from Kulu to Kumaon.</p>

<p>The forms <i>flabalba</i> and <i>confusa</i> both rare. Nothing definite can be said about the early stages and habits and the broods. The species has been confused with <i>belladonna</i> (Fabr.), and is still imperfectly understood.</p>

<p class="subsection">107 <i>b</i>. <b>Delias sanaca oreas</b> Talbot.</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca oreas</i>, Talbot, 1928 <i>b</i> (<i>a</i>), p. 178 ({\male}{\female}) (Sikkim); id., 1937, p. 275, pl. xliv, fig. 5 ({\male}), pl. xlv, fig. 1 ({\female}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70; Peile, 1937, p. 51.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i> var. <i>horsfieldi</i>, Elwes (<i>non</i> Gray), 1888, p. 409 (part.), pl. x, fig. 3 ({\female}) (Sikkim).</p>

<p>A very dark race, somewhat resembling <i>perspicua</i> (Fruhst).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with some slight greyish scaling; discal stripes short and thin, partly dusky; submarginal spots very small. Hind wing with spots well defined and without grey suffusion; discal spot in area 4 short and some-what square, its proximal edge distinctly emarginate; discal spots in 2 and 3 smaller than the one in 4.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with only slight grey basal scaling; discal stripe in area 2 not longer than that in 3; grey stripe in the submedian area diffuse, and not completely divided by the submedian fold. Hind wing with discal spot in 4 as on upperside, the spot in 3 also square. </p>

<p>{\female}. Markings as in the {\male} more emphasized, on the fore wing much whiter, with the cell-bar very strongly marked. Hind wing with white cell-stripe, sharply defined; discal spots grey, more defined than in the {\male}, and with proximal white edging; submarginal spots large.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, 6,000-8,000 feet. Known from Sinchul (type) and the Darjeeling district. Taken in June and July. The {\male} not rare, {\female} very rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">107 <i>c</i>. <b>Delias sanaca perspicua</b> Fruhstorfer. (Fig. 122, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna perspicua</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 130, t. 56 <i>a</i> (\female) (Upper Burma).</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca perspicua</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 282; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i> p. 70; Talbot, 1937, p. 276, pl. xliv, fig. 3 ({\female}).</p>

<p>This subspecies inhabits the same area in Burma as <i>D. berinda boyle{\ae}</i> Butl. and both are so remarkably alike that they can be determined with certainty only by an examination of the uncus. The following points of difference between the two species may be observed in Burmese specimens:&#x2014;</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>In <i>perspicua</i> the hind wing underside with the fold in area 1 <i>c</i> scaled with black, the white stripe in 1 <i>c</i> smaller than in 1 <i>c</i> smaller than in <i>boyle{\ae}</i> and usually quite separate, or otherwise almost separate, from the yellow area. Hind wing upperside with the white stripes usually narrow.</p>

<p>In <i>boyle{\ae}</i> the hind wing underside with the fold in are 1 <i>c</i> not scaled with black over the yellow area, the white stripe in 1 <i>c</i> not separated from the yellow area. Hind wing upperside with usually broad white stripes, purer white than in <i>perspicua</i>.</p>

<p>{\male}. Rather dark. Fore wing upperside with very narrow stripes and small submarginal spots. Hind wing markings larger, with a distinct short white distal cell-stripe.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings on fore wing more distinct than on upperside. Hind wing with discal and submarginal yellow spots usually small; discal spot in area 3 not longer than that in 2, and usually shorter; in large-spotted specimens the inner edge of the discal spot in 4 is straight or slightly emarginate; white stripe in 1 <i>c</i> very short, not usually projecting proximally of the spot in 2; fold in 1 <i>c</i> usually scaled with black distally; yellow anal spot either well separated from the inner yellow area or merged with it.</p>

<p>{\female}. Closely resembles the {\female} of <i>berinda boyle{\ae}</i>.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with distinct grey-white markings, the spots and stripes small. Hind wing with a broad white cell-stripe, and well-defined white discal patches which are larger than on the fore wing; patch in area 4 incurved on its proximal edge.</p>

<p><i>underside</i> as in the {\male}, the spots larger; spot in area 4 with its proximal edge usually more distinctly incurved than on upperside, but sometimes this spot is drawn out into a streak as in most examples of <i>boyle{\ae}</i>; hind wing discal spots in 2 and 3 placed with their distal edges at a distance of 4 mm. or less from the inner edge of the corresponding submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-East Burma</span>, 5,000-8,000 feet; also in Yunnan, South-West China and Tong-king. {\male} not rare, {\female} very rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">107 <i>d</i>. <b>Delias sanaca bhutya</b> Talbot.</p>

<p><i>Delias sanaca bhutya</i>, Talbot, 1937, p. 278 ({\male}) (Bhutan).</p>

<p>This subspecies appears to connect <i>oreas</i> Talb. and <i>perspicua</i> Fruhst.</p>

<p>{\male}. Differs from <i>oreas</i> on the upperside of hind wing in having the spot in area 4 less defined and not emarginate on its proximal edge. Differs from <i>perspicua</i> in the reduction of white scaling in the upperside markings. Hind wing discal spots for the most part bluish-grey like the submarginal ones, whilst in <i>perspicua</i> they are for the most part white; spot in area 2 small or indistinct.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with the white stripe in area 1 <i>c</i> rather short and dusted with black; in <i>perspicua</i> this stripe is more prominent and usually without black dusting; yellow border in 1 <i>a</i> narrower than in <i>perspicua</i>; yellow stripe in 1 <i>b</i> not prolonged based except as a very thin line.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>, 6,000-9,500 feet.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias berinda</b> (Moore). (Fig. 123, genitalia).</p>

<p>The species is distinguished from similar <i>belladonna</i> forms by the partly white cell=stripe on the hind wing underside.</p>

<p>The nominotypical form is distinguished from the forms previously described by the absence of yellow on the hind wing upperside. The only other race occurring within the Indian area is <i>boyle{\ae}</i> Butl.; this may be distinguished from the similar <i>sanaca perspicua</i> Fruhst. by the characters given in the description of that form (p. 333). In all cases the species can be known by the uncus having the middle lobe longer than the lateral ones.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i> (fig. 6 <i>b</i>, p. 14).&#x2014;More narrow than that of <i>sanaca</i> and more attenuated anteriorly.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 123).&#x2014;Valve: resembles that of <i>sanaca</i>, the ventral fold less developed. Uncus: middle lobe longer than the lateral ones, which are short, narrow, and curved.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Assam</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to Western and central China. Three subspecies.</p>

<p class="subsection">108 <i>a</i> <b>Delias berinda boyle{\ae}</b> Butler. (Fig. 124. {\male}{\female}; 124 <i>a</i>, valve).</p>

<p><i>Delias boyle{\ae}</i>, Butler, 1885, p. 58 ({\male}) (Darjeeling).</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i> ab. <i>boyle{\ae}</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 130.</p>

<p><i>Delias berinda boyle{\ae}</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 283; Talbot, 1928 <i>b</i> (<i>a</i>), p. 179 ({\female}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70; Talbot, 1937, p. 281, pl. xlvi, fig. 3 ({\male}), pl. xliv, fig. 4 ({\female}), pl. xii, fig. 80 (valve).</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i> var. <i>amarantha</i>, Mitis, 1893, p. 133. pl. ii, fig. 3 ({\male}) (Darjeeling).</p>

<p>{\male}. Distinguished from the nominotypical race by the yellow area on hind wing upperside. Fore wing with grey-white markings; cell-stripe obscure, discal spots short, small, and mostly linear; submarginal spots sharply defined. Hind wing markings largely white; a short and sharply defined distal cell-stripe; discal patches large and sharply defined; submarginal spots not large; inner area with more than the distal half yellow, usually a yellow spot in area 2.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with all markings sharply defined. Hind wing discal spots of medium size, with much white edging; spot in area 4 usually white, and often with a proximal prolongation; white stripe in 1 <i>c</i> short, and not produced proximally of the stripe in area 2; fold in 1 <i>c</i> not scaled with black where it crosses the yellow area; yellow anal spot rarely separated from the yellow area in 1 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. Closely resembles this sex of <i>perspicua</i>. Hind wing underside with the spots in areas 2 and 3 having their distal edges placed at a distance of over 4 mm. from the inner edge of the submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, the submarginal spots and the hind wing patches smaller than in <i>perspicua</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 79-96 mm.; {\female}, 92-100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.&#x2014;A rare colour form exists in which all the yellow markings on both sides are of a deep brick-red. This is <b>amarantha</b> Mitis. There is a single specimen ({\male}) in the British Museum, without exact locality.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, 5,000 feet; Yunnan and South-West China. Known from Darjeeling (type), the Southern Shan States, Bernardymo, and Bhamo district. There is a single {\male} in the British Museum from Nepal. Has been taken in South-East Tibet (Drowa Gompa) at an elevation of 10,000 feet. Both sexes not rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">108 <i>b</i>. <b>Delias berinda berinda</b> (Moore). (Fig. 125, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Thyca berinda</i>, Moore, 1872, p. 566 ({\female}) (Khasi Hills).</p>

<p><i>Delias berinda</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 167, pl. 530, figs. 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}, type) (text partim).</p>

<p><i>Delias berinda berinda</i>, Jordan, 1925, pp. 282-3, figs. 5, 7 (genitalia); Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i> pl. iii, fig. 77 (genitalia); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70; Talbot, 1937, p. 280, pl. xxvii, fig. 84 (scent-scale), pl. xlv, fig. 5 ({\male}), pl. xlvi, fig. 5 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 51.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> black with grey-white markings. Fore wing cell with usually only slight grey scaling; discal stripes usually small and indistinct; submarginal spots small and distinct. Hind wing cell with a short and indistinct distal stripe; discal spots usually small and linear, spot in area 2 sometimes absent; submarginal spots small; inner area entirely without yellow, being either black or with proximal grey-white scaling.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> black. Fore wing markings more distinct than on upperside. Hind wing discal spots rather small, those in areas 4 and 5 usually white; submarginal spots in 1 <i>c</i> to 4 much smaller than the others; inner area usually unmarked, sometimes a narrow white bar in 1 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> paler than the {\male}; markings slightly yellow, or on the hind wing white. Fore wing discal markings and spot in end of cell more distinct than in the {\male}. Hind wing with cell-stripe prominent, white, narrow and pointed at both ends, sometimes dusky; discal spots diffuse and somewhat dusky, no spot in 2; inner area as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 84-96 mm.; {\female}, 100 mm.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> (Naga and Khasi Hills and Abor country) and <span class="smallcaps">Northern Burma</span> (Chin Hills); occurring from 3,000 to 7,000 feet. Not common.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias belladonna</b> (Fabr.). (Fig. 126 <i>a-c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>Distinguished from all other species of the group by the cell-patch of the hind wing underside being entirely yellow; by the yellow basal costal patch on both sides of the hind wing being shorter, more rounded, and not distally produced; by the discal spot in area 6 of the hind wing underside being usually white; by the clearly-defined discal submedian patch on the fore wing underside. In the {\female} there is no cell-stripe on the hind wing upperside, or at most only a distal spot.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i>.&#x2014;Smaller than those of the preceding species in the <i>Belladonna</i> group, and with a larger disc.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 126).&#x2014;Valve: somewhat as in <i>sanaca</i> (Moore) and <i>berinda</i> (Moore), ventral fold narrow; cavity smaller, and the flap more pointed than in other species of the group. Uncus: the three lobes of equal length, the middle one narrow, the lateral ones slightly curved.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-West India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Western, Central, and Southern China, Yunnan, Tong-king, Siam, the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, and Celebes. Not recorded from Borneo. Ten subspecies, half of these occurring within the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">109 <i>a</i>. <b>Delias belladonna horsfieldi</b> (Gray). (Fig. 127, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris horsfieldi</i>, Gray, 1831, p. 32 (Nepal); id., 1846, p. 7, pl. viii, fig. 2 (type).</p>

<p><i>Delias horsfieldi</i>, Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 585, pl. v, fig. 19 (pupa) (West Himalayas); Moore, 1904, p. 166 (part.), pl. 529, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna horsfieldi</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 285; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 69, pl. vii, fig. B 6.7 (<i>non</i> B 6.8) ({\male}); Talbot, 1937, p. 288, pl. xlvii, figs. 1 ({\male}), 3 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 50 (text only).</p>

<p><i>Delias hearseyi</i>, Butler, 1885, p. 58 (``Barrackpore,'' err.). </p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i> var. <i>surya</i>, Mitis, 1893, p. 132 (``Kashmir,'' <i>recte</i> Massuri).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The white markings strongly developed, especially on the hind wing. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with large white discal patches and prominent distal cell-spot; in the {\female} these markings are creamy-white, and the cell-spot sometimes fills most of the cell.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings larger and more sharply defined than on upperside, the cell-stripe on both wings prominent. Fore wing with a bar across the distal end of the cell. Some specimens approach the race <i>ithiela</i> Butl. in having the inner yellow area on the hind wing upperside reduced.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 76-90 mm.; {\female}, 75-96 mm.</p>

<p>This race closely resembles the darker specimens of D. <i>sanaca sanaca</i> Moore, and the two have been confused in the records of most authors.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kulu</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span>, 2,000-8,500 feet; also occurs in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> as a form with <i>ithiela</i> Butl. Not rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">109 <i>b</i>. <b>Delias belladonna ithiela</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><i>Thyca ithiela</i>, Butler, 1869 <i>b</i>, p. 242 (``Penang,'' err.).</p>

<p><i>Delias ithiela</i>, Butler, 1871 <i>a</i>, p. 62, pl. 24, fig. 1 ({\male}); Moore, 1904, p. 167, pl. 530m figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i> var. <i>ithiela</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 149; Fruh-storfer, 1910, p. 130.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna ithiela</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 286; Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. iii, fig. 78 (uncus); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i> p. 69; Talbot, 1937 p. 287, pl. xlv, fig. 6 ({\female}), pl. xlvi, fig. 1 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 50.</p>

<p><i>Delias horsfieldi</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Gray), 1904, pl. 529, fig. 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Resembles <i>horsfieldi</i> (Gray), but all the markings on both sides are smaller; hind wing with usually no yellow scaling over the inner area, or with only a small yellow patch which is more often present in the {\female} on the <i>underside</i>. Specimens with a small yellow inner patch on the hind wing <i>upperside</i> somewhat resemble <i>D. sanaca oreas</i> Talb. Some specimens, in which the markings are larger, resemble <i>horsfieldi</i> on the upperside, but the inner yellow area on the underside is more restricted.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x214;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, 2,000-3,000 feet, rarely at 6,000-8,000 feet. Common. Sometimes found in <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> as a rare form with <i>lugens</i> Jord.</p>

<p class="subsection">109 <i>c</i>. <b>Delias belladonna lugens</b> Jordan.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna lugens</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 286 (Assam; North-West Burma); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70; Talbot, 1937, p. 289; Peile, 1937, p. 50.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna</i>, Elwes (<i>non Fabr.</i>), 1888, pl. x, fig. 2 ({\female}) (Khasi Hills).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Markings smaller than in <i>ithicla</i> (Butler), the hind wing <i>upperside</i> never with a yellow anal patch, which also is rarely indicated beneath. A darker race than <i>ithiela</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014; <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Northern Burma</span>, 2,500-8,000 feet. Known from the Naga and Khasi Hills, the Lushai Hills, and Upper Shan States. A single specimen is recorded from <span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>. Sometimes occurs in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> as a rare form with <i>ithiela</i>. Not rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">109 <i>d</i>. <b>Delias belladonna hedybia</b> Jordan.</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna hedybia</i>, Jordan, 1925, p. 286 (Tenasserim; Shan States); Talbot, 1937, p. 290, pl. xlvii, figs. 2 ({\male}), 4 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias belladonna burmana</i>, Evans, 1926, p. 713 ({\male}) (North Burma, Shan States); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70.</p>

<p>A small race resembling both the nominotypical form and <i>horsfieldi</i> (Gray) in certain respects.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Differs from <i>horsfieldi</i> in the hind wing anterior discal spots being smaller, especially on the underside; the orange inner area is as large or larger; discal spot in area 2 in the {\female} tinged with yellow. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing the reduced cell-spot, smaller than the spot in area 2; other spots smaller than on upperside, especially the submarginal ones; inner yellow area large, but well separated from the tornal spot.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 72-88 mm.; {\female}, 74-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x214;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Amherst District</span>, Ataran, 3,000-5,000 feet; {\male} not rare, {\female} scarce. Also occurs in Siam and Perak.</p>

<p class="subsection">109 <i>e</i>. <b>Delias belladonna belladonna</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p><i>Papilio belladonna</i>, Fabricius, 1793, p. 180; Donovan, 1923, pl. 35 ({\female}, type).</p>

<p><i>Delius belladonna belladonna</i>, Talbot, 1937, p. 283, pl. lvi, fig. 6 ({\female} type, after Donovan).</p>

<p>The identity of this race has been the subject of much speculation. No specimen is yet known which quite resembles the figure given by Donovan, or by Jones (Icones, pl. 37, fig. 2, unpublished), the latter figure being the original. It seems possible that the type came from Tong-king or Cochin-China, and the race from this area was treated by Talbot (1937) as the true <i>belladonna</i>. Confirmation is required by an examination of {\female} specimens from the area mentioned, but so far these are absent from collections. The race enters the Indian area in the Bhamo District of Burma.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Somewhat resembles <i>hedybia</i> Jordan and <i>horsfieldi</i> (Gray), but is larger than these, and with the markings smaller than in the latter race. Hind wing <i>underside</i> with cell-spot minute or absent. The inner yellow area of the hind wing tends to be reduced. In one of three females from Yunnan the hind wing cell-spot is minute, and the yellow patch in area 2 is well developed; more approaches the {\female} of <i>hedybia</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 80-92 mm., {\female}, 83-92 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-East Burma</span>; Bhamo District, 2,200-5,500 feet. Also in Yunnan and Tong-king. {\male} not rare; {\female} scarce.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias aglaia</b> (Linn{\ae}us). (Fig. 128 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>This species and be recognized by the red subbasal band on the hind wing underside, whilst the upperside of this wing is without a red patch. <i>Upperside</i> of both wings with a bluish-grey discal band and a discocellular dot. {\female} with more complete discal band on fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i> (fig. 6 <i>c</i>, p. 14).&#x2014;Somewhat resembles the scale of <i>D.belladonna</i>, with a large disc, and gently tapering.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 128).&#x2014;Valve: distal edge slightly produced and rounded, dorsal edge posteriorly rounded, ventral fold very weak. Uncus: middle lobe short and triangular, but much more prominent than the lateral ones, which are short and rounded.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i>.&#x2014;Not properly described. According to Fruhstorfer (1910) the larv{\ae} are red, ``each segment with long hairs, of which the lateral ones are black and the dorsal yellow. On young leaves of <i>Nauclea rotundifolia</i> Roxb. (Rubiace{\ae}), where they rest together in large numbers.'' It is much more likely that the larv{\ae} feed on a <i>Loranthus</i> growing on the tree mentioned. According to Kershaw (`Butterflies of Hong Kong.' 1907, p. 96) the eggs are spindle-shaped, smooth, and bright yellow. They are laid in a batch of twenty, thirty or more, on the upperside of leaves of the food-plant. The young larv{\ae} are yellow, sparsely hairy, with the head black.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;South-West and South-East China, Formosa, and Hainan to the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, south and east to the Malay Peninsula, the Philippines, and Java. A number of subspecies are distinguished, of which the nominotypical race alone occurs within the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">110 <i>a</i>. <b>Delias aglaia aglaia</b> (Linn{\ae}us). (Fig. 129, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aglaia</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 465.</p>

<p><i>Delias aglaia</i>, Butler, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 162; de Nic\'eville, 1902 <i>a</i>, p. 24; Moore, 1904, p. 169, pl. 513. figs. 1, 1 <i>a-d</i> ({\male}{\female}, larva, pupa); Bingham, 1907, p. 145; Adamson, 1908. p. 117 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Delias aglaia aglaia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 133; Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. iii, fig. 84, pl. iv, fig. 28 (genitalia); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71, pl. iii, fig. B 6.12 ({\male} underside); Talbot, 1937, p. 317, pl. xlvii, figs. 3 ({\male}), 4 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 52.</p>

<p><i>Papilio dione</i>, Drury, 1773, pl. viii, figs. 3, 4 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio pasithoe</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1767, p. 755.</p>

<p><i>Delias pasithoe</i>, Butler, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 2 (Cachar); id., 1872, p. 29; Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, pp. 839, 856 (Upper Tenasserim); Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 432; Elwes, 1888, p. 407 (Sikkim); Watson, 1891 <i>a</i>, p. 51 (Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with submarginal greyish-white, somewhat hastate spots, each with a short distal streak; a rounded white discocellular spot; cell with some greyish scaling; a greyish-white stripe in area 1 <i>b</i>, and a short and indistinct one in 2. Hind wing with a discal braod greyish-white band which is posteriorly merged with a large bright yellow inner area; a rounded white discocellular spot which is usually separated from the discal band; post-discal greyish-white spots, similar to those on the fore wing, but larger and more prominent; the stripe in area 2 is sometimes yellow, and may be merged with the post-discal spot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> black. Forewing with a well-defined broad greyish-white discal band; other markings as on upperside, but more defined. Hind wing black; a subbasal dark red band from costa to inner margin; inner yellow area as on upperside, but darker; yellow stripes and spots as follows; one filling the distal half of cell, a broad stripe in areas 2 to 4, and three somewhat oval spots in 5, 6 and 7, and two or three small ones close to the upper distal edge of cell; the spot in 7 is usually short and is rarely accompanied by a second proximal spot.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> brownish-black, with similar but more prominent and whiter markings than in the {\male}. Fore wing with a grey-white discal band formed of a large distal cell-patch, a stripe in area 2, and another in 1 <i>b</i>, all separated by the veins. Hind wing with extended grey-white discal area and pale yellow inner area; post-discal spots larger than in the {\male}, with dusky distal edges which are not produced.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 68-84 mm.; {\male}, 69-92 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014; <span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, 2,000-7,000 feet; nor rare. Also in South-West china and Yunnan.</p>

<p class="subsection">110 <i>b</i>. <b>Delias aglaia beata</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p><i>Delias aglaia beata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1905, p. 76 (Mergui Islands); id., 1910, p. 133; Talbot, 1937, p. 321.</p>

<p>Allied to <i>parthenope</i> (Wallace), from the Malay Peninsula, and also to <i>thyra</i> (Fruhst.), from Siam and Tong-king.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> very similar to <i>thyra</i>, with a variable discal band on both wings. The submarginal streaks are thinner and less developed than in <i>thyra</i>, especially at the apex of the fore wing and on the hind wing. Hind wing with more developed yellow area than in <i>parthenope</i>.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with discal band broader han in <i>thyra</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with the submarginal streaks less distinct than in <i>thyra</i>. Fore wing with a white discal band, sometimes clouded over, and much wider than in <i>thyra</i> or in <i>a</i>. <i>aglaia</i> (Linn.). Hind wing with broad white discal and inner area, reaching end of cell and basal part of area 2.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing as in the {\male}; fore wing with the band broader.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 72-82 mm.; {\female}, 74-84 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Mergui Islands</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Lower Tenasserim</span>: not common.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias thysbe</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p>This species is at once recognized by a large red basal area on the hind wing, extending to below the cell.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i>.&#x2014;Similar to that of <i>aglaia</i> (Linn.), but shorter and narrower.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 130).&#x2014;Valve: very like that of <i>aglaia</i> forms, the dorsal edge more uniformly rounded. Uncus: resembles that of <i>aglaia</i>, but wider and with more prominent lobes.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South India; Simla</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Yunnan, Siam, and Tong-king, to the Malay Peninsula. Four subspecies, including two in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">111 <i>a</i>. <b>Delias thysbe pyramus</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 130 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Thyca pyramus</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 347 (Nepal).</p>

<p><i>Delias thysbe pyramus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 134, t. 56 <i>a</i>; Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. iii, fig. 89, pl. vi, fig. 10 (genit.); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71; Talbot, 1937, p. 335, pl. xxviii, fig. 94 (scent-scale); Peile, 1937, p. 52.</p>

<p><i>Pieris thysbe</i>, Gray (<i>non</i> Cramer), 1846, p. 8. pl. 6, fig. 1 ({\male}) (Nepal).</p>

<p><i>Delias thysbe</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Cramer), 1904, p. 171, pl. 532, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> {\female}; Bingham, 1907, p. 146, pl. xvii, fig. 117; Adamson, 1908, p. 117 (Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with markings ashy-grey; four subapical stripes in areas 4, 5, 6, and 8, their distal ends pointed and almost touching the margin; in area 3 a long broad stripe; in areas 2 and 1 <i>b</i>, a submarginal patch, the one in area 2 somewhat ovate, the one below it more square, and toothed on its proximal edge; a discal patch in the base of area 2, and a broad submedian stripe extending from the base to near the submarginal spot, are more bluish-grey; a bar in the end of the cell, anteriorly wider; two small spots in areas 4 and 5, placed against the cross-veins; usually an indistinct tornal spot on the inner margin. Hind wing with a large red basal area, its distal edge incurved in the cell. Distal dusky grey-white stripes well developed in areas 2 to 6, all more or less distally pointed, and proximally only divided by the veins; a short stripe in 7 almost touches the red proximal part of this area; a narrow bar across the end of the cell, adjacent to the stripe in area 4. Between the inner edge of these stripes and the red area is a broad band of blackish-brown ground-colour; a yellow inner area, the stripe in 1 <i>c</i> bright yellow, as also often the distal part of 2, with sometimes a distal spot of the same colour in area 3; area 1 <i>b</i> usually tinged ochreous.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with discal patches on the whole larger. Hind wing with a larger cell-spot, which is buff-yellow and triangular; the black discal band of variable width. A broad red subbasal band from vein 8 to the inner margin; this band is darker than on upperside, sprinkled with black scales, and the veins crossing it more heavily black than on upperside. Distal stripes pale yellowish-buff, distal inner area brighter yellow, and the two stripes in areas 1 <i>b</i> and 1 <i>c</i> form a somewhat oblong bright yellow patch which reaches the margin.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing resembles the {\male} in the colour and form of the distal markings and cell-bar, but the stripes are darker grey; discal patches larger than in the {\male}, the two below the cell strongly marked. Hind wing with red basal area as in the {\male}, showing a tendency to reduction posteriorly in and below the cell, especially in Burma specimens; distal stripes in areas 1 <i>c</i> and 2 always bright yellow, usually also those in 3 and 4, which may be often dusted with black; the stripe in 5 also sometimes bright yellow, and a triangular spot in the end of the cell is also similarly coloured.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}. The yellow coloration, in museum specimens, tends to become deeper and more ochreous with age.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 80-90 mm.; {\female}, 84-98 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Bhutan, Assam</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; also in Western Yunnan and Western Siam. Not rare, and common in most places where found.</p>

<p>A male from the Khasi Hills, with white, instead of red and yellow, markings on both sides, is in the Tring Museum.</p>

<p class="subsection">111 <i>b</i>. <b>Delias thysbe kandha</b> Doherty.</p>

<p><i>Delias kandha</i>, Doherty, 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 262 (Madras); Moore, 1904; p. 173.</p>

<p><i>Delias thysbe kandha</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 146; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 134; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71; Talbot, 1937, p. 337.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Pale markings larger than in <i>pyramus</i> (Wall.), with smaller and better defined black areas. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the apical grey steaks obscurely tinged with ochreous. Hind wing with the inner area pale cream instead of yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with discal markings and inner area almost uniform bright yellow, inclining to lemon; the basal ochre spot is much larger and more distinct than in <i>pyramus</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 98 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South India</span>. The only known specimens are 4 {\male}{\male}, 3 {\female}{\female}, obtained by Doherty on the Potingi Pass, 3,000-5,000 feet, in the Eastern Ghats, in the Vizagapatam District of the Madras Presidency.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias descombesi</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p>This species is characterized by the possession of a red stripe in the basal part of area 7 of the hind wing underside. <i>Upperside</i> largely white, the {\female} with a black hind wing border bearing submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with white vein-streaks and sub-apical and submarginal spots. Hind wing largely yellow or orange, with a marginal black border.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i> (fig. 6 <i>d</i>, p. 14).&#x2014;Long and narrow, gently tapering, with a large disc.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 131).&#x2014;Valve with apical process prominent and slightly curved; cavity with a large flap. Uncus very broad, with short triangular middle lobe, the outer lobes being only rounded lateral expansions of the tegumen.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, south and east to Flores. Five subspecies, of which only the nominotypical form occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="heading">112. <b>Delias descombesi descombesi</b> (Boisduval). (Fig. 131 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Pieris descombesi</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 465 (Cochin-China).</p>

<p><i>Delias descombesi</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 839; Elwes, 1886, p. 433; id., 1888, p. 408; de Nic\'eville, 1883 <i>b</i>, p. 98; Manders, 1890, p. 532; Bingham, 1907, p. 144, pl. xvii. fig. 111; Adamson, 1908, p. 118 (Burma); Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. iv, fig. 101, pl. vi, fig. 9 (genit.).</p>

<p><i>Piccarda descombesi</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 183, pl. 536, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> (\male), 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p>Delias descombesi descombesi, Talbot, 1937, p. 377, pl. xiv, fig. 111 (genit.), pl. xxx, fig. 109 (scent-scale), pl. lxvii, figs. 1, 2 (gynan-dromorph).</p>

<p><i>Delias descombesi leucacantha</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 131, t. 52 <i>b</i> (Sikkim); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 70. pl. vii, fig. B 6.11 ({\male} underside), </p>

<p><i>Delias descombesi</i> {\female} f. <i>leucog{\ae}a</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 131; Talbot, 1937, p. 381.</p>

<p>Delias <i>descombesi</i> {\female} f. <i>auriga</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 131; Talbot, 1937, p. 381.</p>

<p>{\male} <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with costa narrowly black, and a small black apical area which extends on the margin to about vein 4, with usually some black scaling below this vein; sometimes the apical area is for the greater part bluish-grey, owing to the encroachment of white scaling. Hind wing white, except for some thin black marginal dusting in most specimens.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with black ground-colour, the veins very thinly streaked with white; a narrow discocellular white bar, three subapical white stripes, and four submarginal spots; the subapical stripes distally narrower and lightly dusted with black; the submarginal spots in areas 3 and 4 smaller than the others, and all less defined distally. Hind wing yolk-yellow; a broad subcostal red stripe in area 7, extending from the base of the area to the middle of costa, rest of the area black; area 5 black; costa edged with yellowish-white, and its base yellowish-white; an outer marginal black border which is deeply toothed on the veins; six submarginal spots of variable size, either yellow or white, divided proximally only by the veins, and with sharply defined proximal edge; below the cell, in the basal area, some dark scaling.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with black ground-colour; veins 1 <i>a</i> to 4 streaked with grey-white for their proximal two-thirds, as well as the upper and lower margins of the cell; some slight grey-white dusting over the basal half of costa and cell and below the ell; a sharply defined discocellular white bar which, on the lower vein, forms a rounded spot; seven submarginal white spots, of which those in areas 2 and 3 are always the smaller, the others subject to variation; the subapical spots in 5 and 6 each with a linear distal prolongation. Hind wing creamy- to yellowish-white, with a broad black marginal border which invades the light area between the veins as in the {\male} underside; a series of yellowish or greyish-white marginal streaks on the intraneural folds.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing as in the {\male} but darker. Hind wing paler than in the {\male}, the veins streaked with white, which merges into the ground-colour; marginal black border wider than in the {\male}, with longer invaginations between the veins; yellow area more or less dusted with black, and a black steak along lower margin of cell; submarginal spots larger than in the {\male}, and usually more distinctly separated from one another.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 65-88 mm; {\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.&#x2014; The species is subject to much individual variation within small limits. There is a light form in both sexes and two forms of female. Very rarely the hind wing sub-constal stripe is of a deep chestnut colour instead of red. In the {\female} the fore wing is sometimes without any vein-streaks, or these streaks are very large.</p>

<p>Form <b>leucacantha</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;This is much the commoner form. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with strongly developed white vein-streaks and submarginal spots; hind wing with the submarginal spots usually white.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>leucog{\ae}a</b>Fruhst.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing much darkened. Hind wing <i>underside</i> with white submarginal spots.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>auriga</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing much darkened, almost black, with the veins finely white. Hind wing orange-yellow, with yellow submarginal spots on the <i>underside</i>; the underside may be rich orange in some specimens.</p>

<p>A gynandromorph is recorded by Elwes (1888, p. 408) from Sikkim. This specimen is perfectly symmetrical, and the genitalia of both sexes are complete except for the absence of the right-hand valve. The insect is now in the British Museum. It is figured by Talbot (1937).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;``Common in Sikkim at low elevations, and up to 3,000 feet, from March to December. Fond of settling on the sweet-scented flowers of <i>Cinchona ledgeriana</i> Moeus (Rubiace{\ae}) in the lower plantations to Mongpo'' (<i>Elwes</i>, 1888).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, 2,000-5,000 feet. Also in Siam, Annam, Saigon, and Cochin-China. Not rare.</p>

<p class="heading"><b>Delias agostina</b>(Hewitson).</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> white in the {\male};{\female} with fore wing black and hind wing pale to deep yellow.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing in both sexes black-brown with white stripes, of the hind wing yellow.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i> (fig. 6 <i>e</i>, p. 15).&#x2014;Flask-shaped, short and broad, and sharply tapering, with large disc.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 132).&#x2014;Valve with a short triangular apical process directed dorsad. Uncus very broad, middle lobe short and triangular, with blunt tip; lateral expansion of the tegumen well rounded, bearing small side lobes.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Siam, Annam, and the Malay Peninsula. Three subspecies, of which only the nomino-typical form occurs in the India area.</p>

<p class="heading">113. <b>Delias agostina agostina</b> (Hewitson). (Fig. 132 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Pieris agostina</i>, Hewitson, 1852-5, <i>Pieris</i> 1, pl. i, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}) Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Thyca agostina</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 353 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias agostina</i>, Elwes, 1888, p. 408; Watson, 1888, p. 25; id., 1891, p. 51; id., 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 668; Manders, 1890, p. 533; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 311; Bingham, 1907, p. 147, pl. xvii, fig. 112; Adamson, 1908, p. 117 (Burma); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 69, pl. vii, fig. B 6.1 ({\male} underside).</p>

<p><i>Piccarda agostina</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 181, pl. 535, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias agostina agostina</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 123, t. 54 <i>d</i>; Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. iv, fig. 111, pl. vi, fig. 11 (genit.); id., 1937, p. 433, pl. xiv, fig. 121 (genit.), pl. xxxi, fig. 12 <i>c</i> (scent-scale).</p>

<p><i>Pieris nesba</i>, Lucas, 1852, p. 324 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias agostina infumata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 174 (Tenasserim); id., 1910, p. 124, t. 54 e.</p>

<p><i>Delias agostina orita</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 183 ({\female}) (Tong-king).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with black apical area, which narrows to a point at veins 3 or 2, and bears a series of five small white submarginal spots; the spots in areas 5 and 6 are larger than the others, and have each a distal dash; costal border black. Hind wing without markings, rarely with black marginal marks on veins 2 to 4.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with ground-colour blackish-brown and white stripes between the veins; all the stripes usually wider than the black area between them; these stripes are on the inner margin and in areas 1 <i>b</i> to 8, and in the cell; black marginal border bearing white spots, more strongly marked than on upperside, and reaching vein 2. Hind wing pale to deep yellow; a narrow black border which reaches veins 5 or 6, and bears four or five somewhat linear white spots, each of which has a small marginal projection on the fold; costa edged thinly with white; fringe of fore wing white; of the hind wing white from costa to area 4, and posteriorly dusky.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing blackish-brown; cell and costa dusted with grey; short, narrow post-cellular stripes which vary from dusky grey to grey-white; some specimens are very dark with slight grey powdering, and others show prominent grey-white stripes; a submarginal row of four to six rather small white spots, the apical ones more linear. Hing wing pale to deep yellow, inner area paler; veins more or less dusted with black, and vein 6 always heavily black; marginal black border of varying width, its edge crenulate; a submarginal row of five or six white dots, each connected to the margin by a short dash on the fold.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}. Fore wing with white stripes narrower, Hind wing with the veins usually whitened, whilst the marginal border is wider and the spots larger, the two or three anterior ones usually yellow.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 64-78 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Lower Burma</span> (Dawna Range), 3,000-5,000 feet. Also in Siam and Tong-king. Not rare, and common in parts of Burma and in the Khasi Hills.</p>

<p class="subsection">114. <b>Delias eucharis</b> (Drury). (Fig. 133 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, genitalia; Pl. III, figs. 1, larva, 2, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eucharis</i>, Drury, 1773, pl. x, figs. 5, 6 ({\male}); Cramer, 1779, pp. 14, 16, pl. cci, figs. B, C ({\male}), pl. ccii, fig. C ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris eucharis</i>, Horsfield &amp; Moore, 1857, p. 80, pl. 1, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa).</p>

<p><i>Delias eucharis</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 140, pl. liv, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}), 1 <i>b</i> (larva and pupa); Forsayeth, 1884, pp. 377, 385 (life-history); Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890 <i>a</i>, p. 358 (life-history); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 569; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 586.</p>

<p><i>Piccarda eucharis</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 175, pl. 534, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>d</i> (larva and pupa, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias eucharis</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 141, pl. xvii, fig. 109; Fruh-storfer, 1910, p. 124, t. 51 <i>a</i>; Manders, 1912, p. 153; Bell, 1912, p. 1149, pl. 1, fig. 17 (larva, pupa), pl. i, fig. 59 ({\male}), 59 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (life-history); Ghosh, 1914, p. 27, pl. iii, figs. 1-4 (egg, larva, pupa, imago); Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. v, fig. 130, pl. vii, fig. 65 (genit.); Fraser, 1930, p. 260; Yates, 1931, p. 1006; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 69, pl. vii, fig. B 6.3 ({\male}); Talbot, 1937, p. 497, pl. xvi, fig. 144 (genit.), pl. xxxiii, fig. 143, 144 (scent-scale), pl. liii, fig. 6 (pupa); Peile, 1937, p. 49, pl. i, fig. 7.</p>

<p>This species can be recognized by the hind wing beneath bearing a submarginal row of large brick-red spots. It is one of the best known species of the genus, and is an ornament among the butterflies inhabiting Ceylon and the plains of India.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with all the veins blackened; a submarginal black line, anteriorly placed mid-way between margin and end of cell, angled at vein 5, and reaching vein 2 or the submedian; this line marks off a submarginal row of seven white spots and a linear apical mark; the three anterior spots are elongate, the fourth, in area 4, is short and narrow, the fifth and sixth more triangular, and the posterior one is square and large, not always clearly separated; these spots, excepting the lower one, are distally pointed or narrowed, and they touch or nearly touch the margin. Hind wing with a submarginal black line from vein 2 to vein 6, at veins 3 and 4 it is placed about mid-way between cell and margin;marginal area slightly pink from the colouring showing through from below; veins 1 <i>b</i> to 6 black from the submarginal line to the margin, and at the end of each is a small marginal black triangular spot, its base on the margin.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, and all the veins heavily blackened; submarginal line as on upperside, but much heavier; submarginal spots as on upperside, either all white or with the subapical two and the linear apical mark yellow. Hind wing with a submarginal heavy black line from the costa to vein 1 <i>b</i>; area proximally of the submarginal line yellow, with the exception of area 5 which is usually white, and area 6 which is sometimes partly white; there is a thin white distal edging to the yellow proximal area, except where the veins cross it; all veins blackened; marginal area occupied by a row of six large brick-red spots each edged with a dusting of dull white, and in shape somewhat square or subtriangular, the pointed distal end touching the margin; a small anal spot in area 1 <i>b</i>; the spots are only separated by the thinly blackened veins, and the marginal area between the spots is black. Fringes dull white, anteriorly on the fore wing blackened slightly between the veins.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with all the veins heavily blackened. Fore wing ground-colour greyish dusky white; submar\'aginal line much heavier than in the {\male}, the spots a little smaller, the subapical ones with a yellowish tinge. Hind wing with veins 2 to 8 heavily blackened, more so in the proximal area; proximal area pale buff; veins 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i> thinly darkened; a prominent row of six submarginal spots, white, tinged with pink, of similar size and shape to those of the {\male} underside.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> resembles the {\male}. Fore wing subapical spots yellow. Very dark specimens occur in which the light markings on the fore wing are much reduced. In some specimens the ground-colour of the fore wing is yellowish. Hind wing with veins slightly more blackened than in the {\male}; proximal area with area 5 only white at its distal end, and area 6 usually yellow.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 66-83 mm.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i> (fig. 6 <i>f, g,</i> p. 15).&#x2014;Flask-shaped, very broad at the base, with a thick and scarcely tapering neck, which is furnished with fimbri{\ae} for half, or nearly half, its length; the disc rather large.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 133).&#x2014;Valve broad, with rounded apical edge, ventral edge slightly rounded, dorsal edge strongly excurved posteriorly. Uncus rather broad, with three small and well separated lobes; middle lobe triangular, larger than the lateral ones, which are short, narrow, and rounded.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.&#x2014;Much individual variation occurs on the underside (see Manders, 1912). The species has a restricted range, and so has not produced any subspecific form. A rare aberration occurs in which the hind wing spots are yellow instead of red.</p>

<p><i>Life</i>-<i>cycle</i>.&#x2014;According to Ghosh (1914), two periods were observed, as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<table border="0">
  <tr>
    <td>Eggs, apparently freshly laid, collected.</td>
    <td>8th March, 29th November.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Eggs hatched</td>
    <td>11th-12th March, 4th December.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Caterpillars pupated</td>
    <td>1st April, 21st January.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Butterflies emerged.</td>
    <td>19th April, 11th February.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p><i>Egg</i>.&#x2014;``The eggs are deposited usually on the upper surfaces of tender leaves of the mistletoe, one to several eggs being laid on the same leaf. Up to sixty-nine eggs have been found in a cluster on a single leaf. Even when thus deposited in a cluster, unlike most butterfly eggs, they are scattered irregularly. They stand vertically on the surface on one end, which is broad, or lie on one side. The egg is about 1&#x00BD; mm. high and about 1 mm. in diameter at the base. It is round, flask-shaped, being narrow at the top, which, however, does not end in a point but is concave. There are longitudinal ribs on the surface. The upper ends of the ribs run beyond and project to some extent beyond the rim of the concavity. The colour is yellow''(Ghosh, 1914).</p>

<p>The larva and pupa have been fully described by Bell (1912 <i>a</i>), and the following is taken from his descriptions:&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014; The larva, on emerging, eats the egg-shell, and then moves off, closely followed by the others, to the margin of the leaf, which is nearly always on old one, and never a very young one. They commence feeding side by side, finishing one leaf after another, until full-fed. The are always badly parasitized, generally by Diptera. They are sluggish in movement, and drop by a silk thread when disturbed, though not very readily. When about to pupate, each larva goes off by itself and attaches itself by the tail-pad and girdle to a horizontal or perpendicular surface.</p>

<p>Head round and somewhat flat, black, with a white line at the base of the jaws and mandibles; antenn{\ae} white, black-tipped. The body is coloured a greasy, greenish-yellow brown; second segment with anterior half white, and behind this a dorsal black patch; a lateral white line on segments 2 and 3; head sparsely covered with white hairs; segment 2 with six white hairs; a subdorsal row of long, white, erect hairs; a dorso-lateral and supraspiracular row of white hairs; body covered with small white tubercles bearing each a small, erect white hair; venter yellow. Length, 40 mm.; breadth, 6 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014; Head rounded in front, the vertex bearing two subdorsal, cylindrical, round-topped, short tubercles, one on each side; a single central, short tubercles, one on each side; a single central, short and spherical, very short-pedicelled  tubercle, directed forward; segment 2 highly carinate in dorsal line, separated from segment 2 by a depression, short, with a broad and convex tubercle on the shoulder; abdomen swollen at segment 7, which is the stoutest part of the body; cremaster stout, triangular and down-curved; a dorsal row of pointed, conical, rather large tubercles on segments 6 to 11; a subdorsal row of much smaller tubercles on segments 2 to 12, and a supraspiracular row on segments 3 to 9. The surface is smooth, shiny, and of a slightly greenish light yellow; front tubercle of head, dorsal tubercles, and lateral tubercles on 6 to 9 shiny black; abdomen patched laterally with black on segments 10 to 12; sides, underside, and base of cremaster are marked more or less with black, and there are black marks on the wing-cases and underside of head. Length, 25 mm.; breadth, 7 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014; The larv{\ae} feed on <i>Loranthus</i> growing on various trees, such as mango, sissoo (<i>Dalbergia sissoo</i> Roxb., Leguminos{\ae}), gula (<i>Ficus glomerata</i> Roxb. Morace{\ae})m etc., and are very largely found about March. The butterfly has been bred upon <i>Loranthus longiflorus</i> Descr., <i>elasticus</i> Descr., and <i>scurrula</i> Linn. The butterflies have been observed at Pusa and at Rangpur to visit mustard flowers in large numbers in November and December. They are weak fliers and flutter about, hardly ever flying straight. They rest with the wings closed over the back, are found on the wing in all weathers, and occasionally may be seen drinking at moist patches on roads and in river beds in the hot weather. The {\male} is said to have a strong scent, sometimes very strong, something like that of sweet briar.</p>

<p><i>Mimicry</i>.&#x2014;<i>D. eucharis</i> (Drury) is very closely resembled by <i>Prioneris sita</i> Feld. on both surfaces and in both sexes. The resemblance on the underside of the hind wing is very startling, and represents one of the best known examples. Both species were observed by Fraser (1931) at Lakati, flying together, the <i>Prioneris</i> in overwhelming superiority.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span> as far as the lower slopes of the Himalayas. Abundant in Ceylon up to 4,000 feet, and elsewhere up to 7,000 feet.</p>

<p class="family-heading"><b>Delias hyparete</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing usually with a black apical area, and the veins black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the veins black. Hind wing with a submarginal band of red spots, the basal area with more or less extended yellow.</p>

<p><i>Scent-scale</i>.&#x2014;Resembles that of <i>D. eucharis</i> (Drury), but is sharply tapering, with a narrower and longer neck.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 134).&#x2014;Valve as in <i>D. eucharis</i>, the dorsal edge more evenly rounded. Uncus very similar to that of <i>eucharis</i>, narrower, the lobes a little smaller.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>. An Indo-Malayan species, which ranges from the Philippines, Borneo, Java, and Sumatra to South China. It is very variable, and seventeen subspecies are to be distinguished, of which three are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">115 <i>a</i> <b>Delias hyparete ethire</b> Doherty.</p>

<p><i>Delias ethire</i>, Doherty, 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 262 ({\male}{\female}) (Madras); Taylor, 1888, p. 15 (Orissa).</p>

<p><i>Piccarda ethire</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 180.</p>

<p><i>Delias hierta ethire</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 143.</p>

<p><i>Delias hyparete ethire</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 125; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 69; Talbot, 1937, p. 509.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with the red band narrower than is usual in <i>indica</i>. Fore wing with submarginal spots more prominent than is usual in <i>indica</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> much lighter on both wings than most <i>indica</i>. Fore wing submarginal spots yellowish and more prominent than in the lighter specimens of <i>indica</i>. Ground-colour creamy-white on both wings.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with submarginal spots usually mostly yellow, with the veins more heavily darkened than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>: Madras to Bengal. Rare, more frequent in the Madras Presidency, but recorded by Taylor (1888) as being very common at Khurda, in Orissa.</p>

<p class="subsection">115 <i>b</i>. <b>Delias hyparete indica</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 134 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Thyca indica</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 351 ({\male}{\female}) (Burma, Siam).</p>

<p><i>Delias hyparete hierte</i> ab. <i>indica</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 125.</p>

<p><i>Delias hyparete indica</i>, Talbot, 1929 <i>a</i>, pl. v, figs. 131, 132 (genit.); id., 1937, p.507.</p>

<p><i>Pieris hierte</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> H\dd{u}bner), 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 758.</p>

<p><i>Delias hierte</i>, Watson, 1888, p. 25; id., 1891, p. 51; id., 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 668; Manders, 1890, p. 533; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 311.</p>

<p><i>Piccarda hierte</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 178, pl. 532, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}) (Nepal); id., 1. c., pl. 533, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}) (Burma); Adamson, 1908, p. 117 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Delias hierta</i> (sic), Bingham, 1907, p. 142, pl. xvii, fig. 110.</p>

<p><i>Delias hyparete hierte</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 125, t. 51 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 69.</p>

<p><i>Thyca devaca</i>, Moore, 1872, p. 566 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias hyparete ciris</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 125, t. 51 <i>b</i> (Siam).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with all the veins blackened; a black subapical area of varying extent, not reaching the cell; sometimes these are only dusted with black, the more or less distinct white or dusky spots in this area suppressing the distal black, though not effacing the inner edge, which always remains as a heavy post-discal line. Hind wing rarely with slight marginal black, but the veins often blackened distally.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the veins more heavily black; subapical spots clearer white and larger than on upperside, variable in size, the anterior three at least linear, and all distally pointed, with a prolongation to the margin. Hind wing with the yellow area of variable extent, usually extended beyond the cell and only reaching the red band posteriorly; all the veins, excepting 1 <i>a</i>, are blackened; submarginal band of six brick-red spots separated by the veins, the three posterior ones rather large, those in areas 2 and 3 with a proximal point; no proximal black edging to these spots; a distal black edging of from 1 to 2 mm. in width.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> usually rather darkened; with two exceptions all the veins of both wings heavily darkened; vein 1 <i>b</i> of hind wing thinly blackened, vein 1 <i>a</i> not blackened, and sometimes both not blackened at all. Fore wing more or less densely dusted with black, usually to a less degree over the cell and in areas 1 <i>b</i>, 2 and 3; submarginal spots dusky white as in the {\male}, but more prominent on the darker ground. Hind wing with a black outer border of variable width, often much darkened over the distal area, but areas 1 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, and <i>c</i> and the cell always stone-white, this colour extending more or less beyond the cell, and some specimens are note darkened at all.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with heavier vein-stripes than in the {\male}, the apical area more extended black, and the subapical spots white or yellow. Hind wing with the veins more heavily blackened and with more extended yellow than is usual in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 72-88 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.&#x2014;The name <i>ciris</i> Fruhst. was founded upon Siamese specimens. The type of <i>indica</i> also came from Siam, and both refer to the darker form; all transitions occur to the very light form. Extreme light females are very rare, and may belong to the dry season. The name <i>devaca</i> Moore was based upon a {\female} in which the hind wing below had been skilfully painted.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, up to 6,000 feet; common; also in Siam, Tong-king, Annam, and Cochin-China.</p>

<p class="subsection">115 <i>c</i>. <b>Delias hyparete metarete</b> Butler.</p>

<p><i>Delias metarete</i>, Butler, 1879 <i>b</i>, p. 550 (Malacca); Distant, 1885, p. 292, pl. xxiv, figs. 13 ({\male}), 14 ({\female}); Moore, 1886, p. 49 (Mergui).</p>

<p><i>Piccarda metarete</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 181, pl. 533, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Delias hyparete metarete</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 125; Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1934, p. 95, pl. iii, fig. 24; Talbot, 1937, p. 510.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with black apical area reaching usually to end of cell; no post-discal black line nor light subapical spots; veins 1 <i>a</i>, 2, and 3 not so heavily blackened as in <i>indica</i>. Hind wing with a marginal narrow black edging and a diffuse dusky border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the apical area very little darkened; a post-discal or subapical line always present, marking off the submarginal spots, which are usually lightly dusted with black. Hind wing yellow area restricted to area 8, base of 7, base or basal half of cell, and the inner area to veins 2 or 3; red spots in areas 1 <i>c</i> and 2 very large, those in 3 to 5 with a proximal black edging which is sometimes faintly continued to vein 2 or to 1 <i>b</i>; spots in areas 4 to 6 much smaller than in <i>indica</i>, the spot in 6 not often present.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> as in <i>indica</i>. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing usually lighter, and with thinner vein-streaks than in <i>indica</i>. Hind wing as in the {\male}, the yellow area slightly more extended.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 64-84 mm.</p>

<p><i>Larva and pupa</i>.&#x2014;``The larva is yellow and hairy, and the pupa is yellow with shining black spots'' (<i>Corbet</i> &amp; <i>Pendlebury</i>, 1934).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;``The butterfly frequents open woods and is found occasionally in gardens, being seen on the wing even at dusk. Although it is most abundant on the plains, it is often quite common at elevations up to 4,000 feet'' (<i>Corbet &amp; Pendlebury</i>, 1934).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Islands</span>, south to Peninsular Siam, the Malay Peninsula, and Sumatra. The type-specimens came from Malacca. Common.</p>

<p class="family-heading">Genus <b>CEPORA</b> Billberg. (Fig. 135).</p>

<p><i>Cepora</i>, Billberg, 1820, p. 76; Scudder, 1875, p. 138 (type, <i>coronis</i> Cram.); Talbot, 1931, p. 228; Klots, 1931, p. 203; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 125 (type, <i>coronis</i> Cram.).</p>

<p><i>Huphina</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 136 (type, <i>coronis</i> Cram.); id., 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 206; Watson, 1894 <i>a</i>, pp. 494, 523, pl. i (seasonal forms); Bingham, 1907, p. 181; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 141; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 63, 72.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>C. coronis</i> Cramer (=<i>nerissa</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing: costa arched, more strongly so than in <i>Appias</i>, apex blunt; outer margin straight; tornus rounded; inner margin straight, about three-fourths the length of the costa; veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9, at mid-way or less between the fork of these veins and end of cell; <i>mdc</i> from a third to more than half the length of <i>ldc</i>.</p>

<p>Hind wing: short and broad; costa arched; apex broadly rounded; outer margin slightly convex; tornus strongly curved, obtuse; inner margin slightly convex; cell elongate; <i>dc</i> veins very oblique; precostal spur fairly long, bent distad from near its base. Antenn{\ae} slender, less than half the length of fore wing, club abrupt. Palpi with segments 1 and 2 fringed anteriorly with slender hairs; segment 3 slender, acute, closely scaled.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;The larv{\ae} feed on Capparidace{\ae}. The butterflies inhabit the lowlands, though a few ascend to 5,000 feet. They are fond of congregating in swarms at wet and moist places, and are mostly slow fliers. Many species exhibit marked seasonal dimorphism.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">India, Ceylon, Burma</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span> to Hainan, South China, and Formosa, south to the Pacific and Australia. Three species occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p><center><i>Key to Species.</i></center></p>

<table width="100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>
      Hind wing upperside broadly orange at the tornal angle .. ...<br />
      Hind wing upperside without orange or yellow coloration. ... ... ..
     </td>
    <td><i>lea</i> (Doubl.), p. 360.<br />2.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>Fore wing underside with a black spot in the middle of area 3, separated from the black border by a white spot .. ...<br />
        Fore wing underside without a detached black spot in area 3</td>
    <td><i>nerissa</i> (Fabr.), p. 362.<br /><i>nadina</i> (Luc.), p. 367.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="family-heading"><b>Cepora lea</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Recognized by the orange tornal area of hind wing. Fore wing white.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to Sumatra and Borneo. Only the nominotypical form occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">116. <b>Cepora lea lea</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Pieris lea</i>, Doubleday, 1864 <i>a</i>, p. 23 (Moulmein).</p>

<p><i>Huphina lea</i>, Moore, 1886, p. 49 (Mergui); Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 432; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 213, pl. 545, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 182, pl. xvii, fig. 116 ({\male}); Adamson, 1908, p. 119 (Burma, near Rangoon); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72, pl. vii, fig. B 9.1.</p>

<p><i>Huphina lea lea</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 144, t. 64 <i>e</i>.</p>

<p><i>huphina lea continentalis</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1927, p. 401 (Upper Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing white; the base, costal, subcostal and median veins slightly blackened; outer margin bordered with black, broad at the apex and narrowing to the tornus, the inner edge of this border diffuse and slightly produced along the veins. Hind wing with outer margin narrowly bordered with black; tornal area broadly bright orange, merging into canary-yellow along the inner area below the cell.</p> 

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; costal margin black; cell bordered with black; apical and outer marginal area brownish-black, broader than on upperside; two subapical spots bright yellow; two elongate white spots beyond end of cell and a small yellowish spot above them. Hind wing canary-yellow; outer margin broadly bordered with brownish-black; a large yellow apical spot in area 7; indistinct submarginal lunules in areas 2 and 3; a tornal orange area which narrows anteriorly to vein 3; veins 6, 7, and 8 blackened. Antenn{\ae} black. Hairs of the head greenish, of the thorax bluish-grey. Abdomen dusky greenish-white above, purer white below.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but with more extended black. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing similar to the underside in the {\male}; a submarginal white spot in area 1 and another in area 4; in area 2 the inner edge of the marginal black is deeply indented. Hind wing with extended area of canary-yellow, suffusing the whole of the cell.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of both wings with three subapical yellow spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 40-55 mm.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>continentalis</b> (R\dd{o}ber).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with narrower marginal black, the white stripes in areas 3 to 6 more extended. Hind wing with narrower marginal black.</p>

<p>Underside with the dark marginal borders, especially on the hind wing, more brownish and slightly narrower than in the wet form. Hind wing with veins 6 to 8 only slightly darkened.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with extended white areas. Fore wing with costal area and median vein only slightly darkened, the post-cellular spots in areas 4 and 5 more prominent. Hind wing with the veins not at all darkened.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Karen Hills</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Southern Burma</span>; common.</p>

<p class="family-heading"><b>Cepora nerissa</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white Fore wing with outer marginal black border especially broad in the apical area; a black spot in the middle of area 2, separated from the black border by a white spot; costal border darkened for its proximal half. Hind wing with outer marginal border of variable extent, sometimes only represented by vein-marks.</p>

<p>{\female}. Black markings more extended on both sides, and the veins mostly darkened, especially the margin of the cell. Fore wing with a submarginal black spot in area 1 <i>b</i>. Hind wing with the outer border bearing submarginal white spots.</p>

<p>In the dry-season form the black markings are reduced in both sexes, especially on the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> much paler.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, India, Burma</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>, north to Formosa, south to sumbawa. Four sub-species in the Indian area.</p>
 
<p class="subsection">117 <i>a</i>. <b>Cepora nerissa phryne</b> (Fabricius). (Pl. II, figs. 7, larva, 8, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Pupilio phryne</i>, Fabricius, 1775.</p>

<p><i>Huphina phryne</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 136, pl. 53, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, larva, pupa); Watson, 1894, p. 494, pl. i, figs. 7-12 ({\male}{\female}); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 574; Bell, 1913, pp. 95-98, pl. i, fig. 61 ({\male}), 61 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (life-history); Ormiston, 1918, p. 143.</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa</i> var. <i>phryne</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 185.</p>

<p><i>Papilio evagete</i>, Cramer, 1779, p. 47, pl. ccxxi, figs. F, G (Coro-mandel); Fabricius, 1793, p. 193 (= <i>phryne</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa evagete</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 141, t. 64 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>; Ormiston, 1924, p. 99; Yates, 1931, p. 1006; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Cepora coronis evagete</i>, Peile, 1937, p. 53, pl. vii, fig. 59 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio zeuxippe</i>, Stoll, 1781, p. 141, pl. 362, figs. E, F ({\female}) (Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa evagete</i> dry form <i>zeuxippe</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 141, t. 64 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio cassida</i>, Fabricius, 1798, p. 427; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 137.</p>

<p><i>Pieris hira</i>, Moore, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 490, pl. xxxi, fig. 17 ({\female}) (N. W. Himalayas).</p>

<p><i>Huphina hira</i>, de Nic\'eville 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 50; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 209, pl. 543, figs. 2 <i>c</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>d</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina pallida</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 137 (Poona).</p>

<p>{\male}. A small race. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with apical black area bearing prominent white spots. Hind wing with marginal black border dentate on the inner edge.</p>

<p>Underside of hind wing with a prominent submarginal dusky black band, interrupted in area 5.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with extensive blackish-brown markings. Fore wing usually with yellow subapical spots; cell heavily bordered with blackish-brown, leaving only a white median streak; veins all darkened, especially the submedian  and vein 4. Hind wing with prominent submarginal white spots within the blackish- brown marginal border; upper margin of cell blackened, the other veins less darkened than on the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>zeuxippe</b> (Stoll), <i>hira</i> (Moore).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with restricted black markings which are blackish-brown in the marginal area and greyish-black in the {\male} in the proximal area.</p>

<p><i>Extreme dry-season form</i> <b>pallida</b> (Swinhoe).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> markings with a distinctly brown tinge, the veins not darkened in the {\male}, the {\female} on fore wing with vein 4 and cell-margins only darkened. Hind wing white, with small marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing pale yellow, the veins only very slightly scaled with black.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 40-55 mm.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;In the 1st and 2nd instars it is oily yellowish-green with a black head, and all the tubercles prominent and large in comparison with what they become later. 3rd instar dark green; venter much lighter, grey-green. Surface of body transversely impressed, with seven fine parallel lines to each segment, each interval between every two lines having a single central row of minute white tubercles, each tubercle bearing a short white hair or bristle; the main tubercles are but little larger than the others, and each bears a somewhat longer hair, which has often a globule of transparent clear liquid at its tip; the whote surface is clothed with extremely minute, brown, erect hairs; a frings of rather long, fine, white, erect hairs all round the body on the subspiracular and lateral ventral areas. 5th instar nearly the same as the 4th. Dark bluish-green, the venter light greyish-green. Length, 27 mm.; breadth, 4mm. (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Cremaster narrow, square at the extremity, very shortly bifid. Colour of body dark bluish-or grass-green; wings greenish-white, as also the venter; segment 2 and top of snout whity-brown; thoracic carina similarly whity-brown, with a fine double black line along the summit, not continued anteriorly beyond the apex; carina of segment 4 similar in colour, and with a similar black line; flat portions of segments 6 and 7 whity-brown, the points of all teeth black; a yellow, supraspiracular, abdominal line along the narrow ledge. Length, 20 mm.; snout, 1.5 mm.; breadth, 7 mm. at segment 7 (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;The butterfly has been bred upon <i>Capparis aphylla</i> Roth., <i>C. sepiaria</i> Linn., <i>C. heyneana</i> Wall., and <i>C. horrida</i> Linn. f. These food-plants are found in all sorts of country. The eggs are laid singly anywhere on the food-plant; a favourite place is the top of a thorn. The cater-pillar always lies in the centre of the upperside of a leaf. The pupa is formed on the upperside of a leaf, sometimes on the underside, or upon a vertical surface as that of a tree-trunk or stone, etc. The imago emerges in about ten days, and remains quiescent for several hours afterwards if left undisturbed. The flight is fast and fairly strong, in more or less of a straight line. Fond of the sun and frequents open spaces near vegetation, coming frequently to flowers, and resting on or near the ground (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913).</p>

<p>Peile (1937) notes that the butterfly is common n the plains, being found about garden hedges. It occurs at Mussooree in the October migrations, and in Kumaon it is common up to 4,000 feet, June to October.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">North-West Provinces</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span>. Common.</p>

<p class="subsection">117 <i>b</i>. <b>cepora nerissa nerissa</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 136 <i>a</i>, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio nerissa</i>, Fabricius, 1775, p. 471; id., 1793, p. 192 (China).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa</i>, Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 135; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 590; Bingham (part.), 1907, p. 183, fig. 49 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio coronis</i>, Cramer, 1775, p. 69, pl. xliv, figs. B, C ({\female}) (China).</p>

<p><i>Huphina coronis</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 207, pl. 543, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}), 1 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>f</i>, 1 <i>g</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>h</i> ({\female}, int. f.), 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Pieris copia</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 340 ({\male}) (``Bengal'').</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa</i> f. <i>copia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 141; Seitz, 1931, p. 172, fig. (gynandromorph).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa phryne</i>, Fruhstorfer (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1910, p. 141, t. 64 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72, pl. viii, fig. B. 9.2 ({\female}).</p>

<p>A large race; apical area of fore wing in {\male} usually without spots.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white; a greyish-blue shade at base of wings and along the veins, due to the dark markings showing through from the underside. Fore wing with veins black; apical area broadly black, narrowing to the tornus. Hind wing with marginal black spots on the veins, of varying size and number, inthe more extreme wet form forming a narrow black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, tinged yellow over the costal and apical area; the veins broadly margined on both sides by dusky black; a black submarginal spot in areas 1 <i>b</i>, 2, and 5. Hind wing yellow, the veins diffusely bordered with black; a heavy dusky submarginal slightly sagittate line from veins 2 to 6; a dusky costal spot in area 7, and a conspicuous chrome-yellow spot in the precostal area. Antenn{\ae} black, obscurely speckled with white; head and thorax bluish-grey; abdomen dusky black; beneath, the palpi and abdomen white, thorax yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to the {\female} of <i>phryne</i>, the black areas still more extended, the wings being brownish-black with white markings. Fore wing with the spot in area 1 <i>b</i> very large, and the proximal white stripe in this area is dusted with black. Hind wing with a submarginal series of greyish-white double spots; a broad white cell-stripe, extended into areas 4 and 5; inner area suffused with yellow.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the {\male}, the veins much more broadly margined with diffuse black scaling.</p>

<p><i>Dry-seasom form</i> <b>copia</b> (Wall.).&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> with black areas much restricted, the veins scarcely darkened on the fore wing, and not at all on the hind wing. Fore wing with usually no spot in area 1 <i>b</i>. Hind wing with black markings restricted to about three small triangular marginal vein-spots.</p> 

<p><i>Underside</i> much paler yellow, somewhat ochraceous. Hind wing distal area yellowish-white, the submarginal line thin, interrupted in area 5.</p>

<p>{\female}. Creamy-white, with brownish-black markings of variable extent, and in the extreme form it much resembles the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>; common.</p>

<p class="subsection">117 <i>c</i>. <b>Cepora nerissa dapha</b> (Moore). (Fig. 136 <i>b</i>, {\male} fore wing).</p>

<p><i>Appias dapha</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 838 (Moulmein).</p>

<p><i>Huphina dapha</i>, Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 432; Watson, 1894, p. 495, pl. i, figs. 1-6 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p>Huphina nerissa var. <i>dapha</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 186.</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa dapha</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 141, t. 64 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Huphina copia</i>, Adamson (<i>non</i> Wall.), 1908, p. 119 (Burma).</p>

<p>A small race in which the apical area of the fore wing upperside is usually without spots, or these are indistinct. The name <i>dapha</i> applies to the dry-season form.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>depuncta</b>, nov.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> more resembles the dry form <i>copia</i> Wall. Fore wing with spot in area 1 <i>b</i> absent, and often also the one in 3; apical area with indistinct marks, often none; veins only slightly darkened. Hind wing with narrow marginal black band, more or less dentate on its inner edge.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with basal two-thirds of costal area greenish-yellow. Hind wing with areas 7 and 8 and inner basal area below cell pale yellow to orange-yellow; veins greyish-black, lightly dusted with greenish; small indistinct submarginal spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> more resembles the wet form <i>phryne</i> (Fabr/), and white markings more extended than in Sikkim specimens. Hind wing as in the {\male}, but the submarginal markings more prominent.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, but markings more accentuated.</p>

<p><i>Types</i>, {\male}{\female}, from Burma, Bhamo district (British Museum).</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>dapha</b> (Moore).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with brownish-black markings. Fore wing without submarginal spots; narrow outer dark border, produced on the veins. Hind wing unmarked, the inner area slightly yellowish.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the apical area, and all the hind wing, pale greyish-brown, the vein-stripes a little darker than the ground-colour. Hind wing with an obscure submarginal line.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with slightly more extended dark markings. Fore wing with prominent submarginal spot in area 3. Hind wing small marginal vein-spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing of a deeper brownish than in the {\male}; a dusky indistinct submarginal band.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>, extending to Siam and the Malay Peninsula. Occurs as a straggler on the Central Nicobars; rare in Assam, but common elsewhere.</p>

<p class="smallcaps">117 <i>d.</i> <b>Cepora nerissa lichenosa</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Pieris lichenosa</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 591.</p>

<p><i>Huphina lichenosa</i>, Watson, 1894, p. 495; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 212, pl. 544, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nerissa lichenosa</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 187; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 142, t. 63 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72.</p>

<p>A large and distinctive race.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with basal half of costal margin tinged with greenish-yellow and dusted sparsely with black; apical third of the wing obliquely from the costa to the tornal angle jet-black, the inner edge of this border irregular and more or less sinuous; an obscure whitish submarginal spot on the black area in 3; vein 4 and <i>ldc</i> sometimes slightly darkened. Hind wing with outer margin anteriorly black, the distal ends of the veins in this area very finely black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with costal margin very broadly and the apex suffused with greenish-yellow; median vein on inner side broadly bordered with dusky black, continued along the basal half of vein 4, and then transversely downwards as a black band, diffuse below vein 3. Hind wing for the greater part moss-green, leaving only obscure elongate spots of the ground-colour apparent in the anterior areas; the whole surface of the wing more or less closely dusted with black.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but is darker, owing to the broad dusky black border to the veins on both the upper and undersides.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>; common.</p>

<p class="family-heading"><b>Cepora nadina</b> (Lucas).</p>

<p>This species is usually larger than most forms of <i>nerissa</i> Fabr., and can be distinguished from that species by the absence of a separated black spot in area 3 of the fore wing underside.</p>

<p>The larv{\ae} feed on <i>Capparis</i> and are very similar to those of <i>nerissa</i>.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Burma</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>, extending to Hainan, Tong-king, and Siam, Annam, the Malay Peninsula, and Sumatra. Four subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">118 <i>a</i>. <b>Cepora nadina cingala</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Huphina cingala</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 219, pl. 546, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>. 3 <i>b</i> ({\male\female}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina cingala</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 142. t. 63 <i>b</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Huphina remba</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Moore, 1857), 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 137, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}); Ormiston, 1917, p. 144; id., 1924, p. 99.</p>

<p>{\male}. Resembles <i>remba</i> (Moore). <i>Underside</i> of hind wing without a pale streak in or beyond the cell; in the wet form with very dark green ground-colour and broad dark brown discal area.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with a whitish basal spot.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, 2,000-4,000 feet; rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">118 <i>b</i>. <b>Cepora nadina remba</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Pieris remba</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 75 ({\male}, South India); Wallace, 1867, p. 340 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina remba</i>, Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Watson, 1894, p. 496; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken 1897 <i>a</i>, p.575; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 217, pl. 546, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i> ({\female}); Bell, 1913, p. 98 (early stages).
</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina remba</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 190; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 142; Yates, 1931, p. 1006; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72, pl. viii, fig. B 9.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina liquida</i>, Swinhoe, 1890, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>remba</b> (Moore).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Resembles the wet form of <i>n. nadina</i>, from which it differs as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with distal half from middle of costa obliquely, to before the tornal angle, intense black, the base with a bluish shade. Hind wing with the distal area dusted with bluish-grey; outer margin anteriorly from apex to vein 4 decreasingly black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white. Fore wing with costal margin, and apex broadly greenish-yellow; a large, prominent, bright yellow subapical spot, below which is a large black irregular patch, angulate at, and touching, the lower apex of cell. Hind wing greenish-yellow, the veins black; a discal band of dense black irroration, its inner edge sharply defined and extended from costa through the cell to vein 1; the lower discal and tornal areas less densely dusted with black; a bright, greenish-yellow, irregular spot in the middle of area 6. Antenn{\ae} dark brown, head and thorax anteriorly with greenish-yellow pile; thorax in median and posterior areas with long bluish-grey hairs; abdomen black; beneath, the palpi and thorax yellow; abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dark brownish-black. Fore wing with base of cell and upper basal half of area 1 white, densely dusted with black; apical half of cell, base of area 3, basal two-thirds of area 2, a submarginal large round spot in area 1, and a pretornal short stripe on inner margin, white. Hind wing with a more or less triangular central area white, its lower margin abruptly transverse, its base and posterior half dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the {\male}, but the distal dusky patch on fore wing larger and more prominent. Hind wing with more prominent dark irregular discal area.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>liquida</b> (Swinhoe).&#x2014;{\male}.<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with restricted black area. Hind wing with narrow outer black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with costal margin and apex broadly dull ochraceous with a yellow tint, this colour on the apex margined on its inner side by an irregular dusky, blackish, subtriangular patch. Hind wing dull ochraceous with a yellow tint; an irregular dusky discal band that does not reach the costa nor inner margin.</p>

<p>{\female}. Darker than the {\male}, the <i>Upperside</i> with slightly extended black markings.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> marking paler and duller than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.&#x2014;Spindle-shaped, with 12 longitudinal ridges, every two anastomosing before the apex and ending together in a single small tooth, the teeth forming a small ring round the top of the egg. Surface shiny, light yellow mottled with rosy red.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Resembles <i>C. phryne</i> (Fabr.). The surface of body covered with small white tubercles, each bearing a short hair; a fringe of fine, rather long white hairs along the sub-spiracular and lateral ventral region. Length, 32 mm.; breadth, 4 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Resembles that of <i>C. phyrne</i> (Fabr.). Green or brownish-green, the flat dorsal parts and the snout and vertex of head yellow or brown; thoracic carina tipped with brown and edged with a thin black line; teeth of abdomen white, tipped with black; ventrally the prominent edges and the somewhat bulging wings are light green. Length, 17.5-20mm.; breadth, 7 mm. between the points of the teeth of segment 7</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913).&#x2014;The eggs are laid on a thorn, a leaf, or anywhere on the plant, generally near the ground. The larv{\ae} feed upon capers, as <i>Capparis heyneana</i> Wall., <i>C. moonii</i> Wight, <i>C. roxburghii</i> DC., and prefer shade. The butterfly is confined to the hills and regions of heavy rainfall. It is very active and somewhat devious in its line of flight, keeping a good deal to the thick underwood. Iit does not usually frequent flowers, and rarely rests on leaves in open places, so that it is not easy to catch. Found mostly in evergreen jungle, and does not rise to any great height above the ground.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>; rare.</p>

<p><b>118 <i>c</i>. Cepora nadina nadina</b> (Lucas). (Fig. 137, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris nadina</i>, Lucas, 1852, p. 333 ({\male}{\female}, Khasi Hills).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 214, pl. 545, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>-2 <i>e</i> ({\male}{\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 188; Adamson, 1908, p. 119 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina nadina</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 142, t.  63 <i>b</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>. p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Pieris nama</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 76 ({\male}{\female}, N., India); id., 1857 <i>b</i>, p. 102, pl. xliv, figs. 1, 2.</p>

<p><i>Huphina nama</i>, Swinhoe, 1893, p. 309, p. 309; Watson, 1897, p. 495, pl. ii, figs. 6, 7; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 214, pl. 545, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> (\male), 2 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina nadina</i> f. <i>nama</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 142.</p>

<p><i>Pieris amba</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 340 ({\male}, N. India).</p>

<p><i>Huphina amba</i>, Swinhoe, 1893, p. 309; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 214, pl. 545, figs. 2 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male} type), 2 <i>e</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina nadina</i> dry form <i>amba</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 142, t. 64 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias amboides</i>, Moore, 1884, p. 13 ({\male}) (Silhet, Assam).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>nadina</b> (Lucas).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with basal half of costal margin suffused with greenish-yellow and sparsely dusted with black; apical area and outer margin black, the inner edge of this area arched and acutely produced inwards along the veins, the marginal black narrowed posteriorly. Hind wing with dark border showing through from below, accentuated by a slight black dusting.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white. Fore wing with costal margin and apex very broadly suffused with greenish-yellow, and dusted more or less densely with black, with diffuse submarginal dusky patches in areas 3 and 4; a submarginal oblique short band, bright yellow, its marginas ill-defined; in areas 1 to 3 the black marginal markings on the upperside show through as a greenish-blue shade. Hind wing suffused with greenish-yellow that leaves only a broad white streak in the cell, continued into areas 4 and 5; the whole surface of the wing more or less densely dusted with black, with a broad posterior obscure dark discal patch, and a broad outer border, between which the area is bright yellow; a spot of bright yellow also in area 6.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing dark brownish-black with white markings; an oval, elongate, broad streak in the cell, continued into the base of area 4; broad steaks, outwardsly ill-defined, from bases of areas 2 and 3; a large submarginal spot in area 1 and a pretornal short streak along inner margin; sometimes the whote of the cell and the greater portion of the basal part of area 1 are white. Hind wing dark brownish-black fading to dusky brownish-white posteriorly; the cell, basal half of area 4, and an elongate, broad, outwardly-pointed streak in area 5 white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the {\male}, but with extended black areas. Hind wing with the veins more strongly edged with black, and the discal dark patch more conspicuous than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Dry from</i> <b>amba</b> (Wall.).&#x2014;{\male}.<p>Upperside</p> with reduced black areas, the marginal black often not reaching vein 1. Hind wing with slight marginal black dusting.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the greenish-yellow suffusion of the wet form replaced by ochraceous-brown. Hind wing with the white markings of the wet form replaced by a paler ochraceous shade than on the rest of the wing; veins broadly edged with black; discal dark band usually obsolescent.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> resembles the wet form, but the ground-colour is paler and duller.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with apical area of fore wing and all the hind wing grey or sandy yellow.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; not rare.</p>

<p><b>118 <i>d</i>. Cepora nadina andamana</b> (Swinhoe).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nama</i> var. <i>andamana</i>, Swinhoe, 1889, p. 398.</p>

<p><i>Huphina andamana</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 217, pl. 546, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <b>b</b> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Huphina nadina andamana</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 190; Fruh-storfer, 1910, p. 142; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 72.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Resembles</i> the nominotypical wet form. <i>Uppeside</i> of fore wing with more extended apical and marginal black. Hind wing with the white makings reduced to a large yellowish-white discocellular spot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with more prominent black inner border to the greenish-yellow apical area.</p>

<p>{\female}. Somewhat resembles the {\male}. Both wings with the basal area posteriorly dusky grey and dusted with black. Fore wing the extended black distal area, anteriorly reaching the upper angle of the cell. Hind wing with the anterior veins broadly edged with black distally, forming an irregular anterior black marginal band.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing darker green than in the {\male}, the post-discal band conspicuous.</p>

<p>There is no special dry-season form, but certain specimens taken in March and April have the black on the upperside of the fore wing much restricted.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>PRIONERIS</b> Wallace. (Fig. 138, venation).</p>

<p><i>Prineris</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 383 (<i>thestylis</i> Doubl.); Butler, 21870 <i>a</i>, p. 39, pl. i, fig. 1 (venation) (type, <i>thestylis</i> Doubl.); Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 140; id., 1904 <i>a</i>, p. 186; Bingham, 1907, p. 150, fig. 38 (venation); Frushtorfer, 1910, p. 135; Klots, 1932, p. 207; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 63, 71; Peile, 1937, p. 52.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>P. thestylis</i> Doubleday.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa widely arched, strongly serrate in the {\male}; apex produced, subacute; outer margin oblique, slightly incurved towards tornus, which latter is rounded; inner margin about two-thirds the length of costa; cell slightly longer than half the length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>mdc</i> very oblique, longer than <i>ldc</i>. Hind wing more or less pyriform; costa nearly straight from base to near apex, then strongly arched, the arch continued along outer margin to tornus; tornus rounded, not well marked; inner margin widely arched; cell long, the area between it and the costa very broad; <i>dc</i> veins very long, lower angle of cell acute; precostal vein long, curved distad. Antann{\ae} long, slender, slightly more than half length of for wing, club gradual. Palpi antieriorly thickly fringed with long stiff hairs; 3rd segment slender, nearly as long as the 2nd, slightly clavate, scaled. Head above with a tuft of long hairs; eyes large, prominent, naked. Thorax and abdomen moderately stout.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Blue-green, with lateral soft white hairs and blue tubercles, those on head and sides with black dots. Food-plant:<i>Capparis</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Light green; head with sharp snout, dorsum carinate, with a yellow line, and with two strong lateral spines.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, India</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to Hainan and South China, south to Borneo, Java, and Sumatra. Eight species known, of which three occur in the Indian area. Some species are rare, others extremely common. They enter into mimetic association with <i>Delias</i>.</p>

<p><i>Key to Species.</i></p>

<p>1. Hind wing underside with a red basal patch. .. .. ...</p>

<p>[p. 377 <i>clemanthe</i> (Doubl.),</p>

<p>Hind wing underside with no red basal patch. ... ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing underside with a marginal series of red spots. .. ... </p>

<p><i>sita</i> (Feld.), p. 375.</p>

<p>Hind wing underside without a marginal series of red spots</p>

<p><i>thestylis</i> (Doubl.), p. 373.</p>

<p><b>Prioneris thestylis</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p>This species resembles on both sides some forms of <i>Delias sanaca</i> (Moore) and <i>D. belladonna</i> (Fabr.). The markings are white and yellow with a black ground-colour, and the hind wing underside has no red markings.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing white, with broad black apical area bearing white spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, the fore wing darker, with small white post-cellular spots. In the wet-season form the {\female} is black with white spots, and more nearly resembles <i>Delias berinda</i> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Mussooree</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, extending to Hainan, South China, and Formosa, and south to the Malay Peninsula. Only the nominotypical subspecies occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>119. Prioneris thestylis thestylis</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Pieris thestylis</i>, Doubleday, 1842, p. 76 (N. India); id., 1847, p. 44, pl. vi, fig. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Prioneris thestylis</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 384; Elwes, 1888, p. 410; Moore, 1904, p. 187, pl. 538, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i>, <i>d</i>, <i>e</i> ({\female}), pl. 539, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 151, pl. xvii, fig. 113; Adamson, 1908, p. 118 (Burma); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71, pl. viii, fig. B 7.1 ({\male}); Klots, 1932, pl. xi, fig. 73 (genitalia); Peile, 1937, p. 52.</p>

<p><i>Prioneris thestylis thestylis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 135, t. 57 <i>e</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pieris seta</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 78 (N. India); id., 1857 <i>b</i>, p. 102, pl. xliv, fig. 3 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Prioneris thestylis</i> f. <i>seta</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 135.</p>

<p><i>Prioneris watsoni</i>, Hewitson, 1868, p. 99 ({\male}{\female}, N. India); Butler, 1872, p. 28 (Silhet); Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 839; id., 1904, p. 189, pl. 539, figs. figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}, type).</p>

<p><i>Prioneris thestylis</i> f. <i>watsoni</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 135, t. 57 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Prioneris thestylis jugurtha</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 135 (Siam).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with white proximal and distal black area, the veins on the former area blackened; costal and apical area to vein 4 black as far as the cell, and continuing broadly to the inner margin; apical area with three long white streaks, and a short one near the apex; submarignal spots in areas 2 to 4, and a tornal spot divided by the fold. Hind wing white, with the veins black on the discal two-thirds; a marginal black border in which submarginal spots are either not detached from the proximal area or are detached by extended black, as in the more extreme wet forms.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> much darker than the upperside. Fore wing with the apical stripes and the submarginal spot in area 5 yellow. Hind wing with blackish-brown ground-colour, and prominent yellow markings, some of which may be edged slightly with white; a basal costal patch with black precostal vein, a broad cell-stripe, seven discal spots in areas 2 to 7, the one in 2 elongate, the one in 5 placed near the cell; a small spot in 7, above the cell; seven submarginal spots, the posterior two sometimes absent, the ones in areas 5 and 6 larger than the others. Antenn{\ae} black; head and thorax clothed with long bluish-grey pile; abdomen blackish; underside of palpi, head, and thorax black, of abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> deep brownish-black, with the following white markings, in addition to a broad sullied white area, distally suffused with yellow, which fills the basal three-fourths of areas 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i> of the hind wing. Fore wing with a slender streak near base of cell, four spots at apex of cell as in the {\male} underside; two slender, somewhat curved streaks from near base of area 1, with a series of elongate discal spots in areas 2 to 6, and a submarginal series of elongate spots or short narrow streaks in areas 1 to 7, the streak in area 1 double; a short marginal streak before the tornus and a large subcostal spot produced outwards as an obscure slender streak in area 9. Hind wing the a broad cell-stripe, a discal series of somewhat oblong spots, and a submarginal series of smaller spots; a large median yellow area reaching to vein 3.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings as in the {\male}, but all a little smaller. Hind wing with discal yellow area below vein 5 more prominent than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 70-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>watsoni</b> Hew.&#x2014;{\male}. Smaller than the wet form, with black areas much restricted. Hind wing <i>upperside</i> white with a yellow tinge, and a thin black outer marginal line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the black area scarcely more extended than on the upperside. Hind wing black restricted chiefly to a stripe filling the proximal half of area 1 <i>c</i>, the greater part of areas 7 and 8, and a narrower outer border; areas 2 to 6 white and occupied by yellow patches, area 6 with two spots, and the patches in areas 4 and 5 sometimes divided.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with more extended black than in the {\male}. Hind wing more strongly yellowish; areas 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i> yellow, with a large anal yellow patch reaching vein 3 and sometimes vein 4; a narrow black outer border, its edge crenulate.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p>Form <b>seta</b> (Moore).&#x2014;An extreme wet form. {\male} with extended black areas. {\female} very dark, with small spots on both sides, and hind wing <i>upperside</i> with also no extended yellow area.</p>

<p>The name <b>jugurtha</b> Fruhstorfer applies to specimens of the nominotypical form in which the submarginal spots on the <i>underside</i> are well developed.</p>

<p>The species is fond of open country and congregates at moist places; the {\female} visits flowers.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Mussooree</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Hainan, and South China; not rare.</p>

<p><b>120. Prioneris sita</b> (C &amp; R. Felder). (Fig. 139, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris sita</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 161, pl. xxv, fig. 12 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Prioneris sita</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 141, pl. 54, fig. 2 ({\male}); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 570; Moore, 1904, p. 190, pl. 536, figs. 2 ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\female}), <i>c</i> (pupa); Bingham, 1907, p. 154; Fruhstorfer, 1910,p. 136; Bell, 1912, p. 1151 (life-history); Ormiston, 1917, p. 127 (Ceylon); id., 1924, p. 82; Yates, 1931 <i>a</i>, p. 1006 (Coorg); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 700, pl. (dry, interm., and wet forms of {\male}); Fraser, 1930, p. 261 (<i>P. sita</i> and <i>D. euchairs</i>); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71, pl. viii, fig. B 7.2 (imago).</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white, with a slight glaucous or greenish tint. Fore wing with the veins margined narrowly with black; outer margin with a narrow, black, strongly dentate border. Hind wing with the veins margined narrowly with black on the distal third; a marginal black line.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing white, costa black, apex suffused with yellow, all the veins from base broadly bordered with black that does not expand at the margin; an ill-defined, transverse, somewhat diffuse, post-discal black band from veins 1 to 7. Hind wing rich chrome-yellow up to a post-discal black band, beyond which the ground-colour is white with a series of large marginal vermilion-red rectangular or truncated cone-shaped spots; veins from base bordered somewhat narrowly but conspicuously with black. Antenn{\ae} brownish-black; head and thorax clothed with long bluish-grey haris; abdomen glaucous-white; underside of palpi and thorax greyish-white, abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to the {\male}, the black edgings to the veins of both wings on both sides broader. <i>Upperside</i> with the veins of both wings black to the base; both wings with a dusky black diffuse post-discal band.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the cell traversed by three slender longitudinal black lines; the yellow and red markings brighter than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. Hind wing with a post-discal black heavy line; veins more heavily black, with triangular marginal spots. Fore wing with the veins more heavily black, and <i>underside</i> markings more darkened than in the dry form.</p>

<p>{\female}. Black markings heavier than in the dry form. Fore wing <i>upperside</i> often with three black lines in the cell, as on the underside. Apex more rounded than in the {\male}, and outer margin slightly falcate at vein 4.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;``Dull blue-green. Head and all the segments dotted with minute blue tubercles, those on the head and sides black-tipped; dorsal surface pubescent; a lateral fringe of soft white hairs below the spiracles'' (<i>Bell</i>, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;According to Bell (1912), this species inhabits the big evergreen jungles of the Western Ghats in Bombay, and generally keeps to the very tops of large and tall trees. The butterfly appears at about 8 <span class="smallcaps">A.M.</span> and disappears after <span class="smallcaps">P.M.</span> It coomes to damp places on roads and in beds of rivers or streams in the hot days preceding the monsoon, and is fond of the sun. The female does not fly round the tree-tops nor comes to damp places. Larva feeds on capers. In Malabar it appears only during September to October (<i>Fraser</i>, 1930 <i>a</i>). In the Ghats it appears at the end of December, becomes plentiful in March, and occurs up to May, also occurring lower down in Coorg (<i>Yates</i>).</p>

<p><i>Mimicry</i>.&#x2014;<i>Prioneris sita</i> bears an extraordinary likeness to <i>Delias eucharis</i> (Drury). The latter is much commoner as a rule, and files all the year round. Fraser (1930 <i>a</i>) records that at Likati both species were in company, but the <i>Prioneris</i> in overwhelming superiority. Its flight is much more strong and swift than that of the <i>Delias</i>. It foregathers with <i>Catopsilia</i> and <i>Appias</i> on wet sand beside the river at Likati, where it is numerous in September.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>; not common, the {\female} always rare.</p>

<p><b>Prioneris clemanthe</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with the veins more heavily darkened in the anterior part of the wing. Hind wing with or without a narrow black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with a red basal spot; the greater part of the wing chrome-yellow, darker over the inner area.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing dusted with black, the veins broadly blackened. Hind wing with an outer dark border of variable width, sometimes enclosing dusky submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing yellow, with red basal spot and white or yellow marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, extending to Hainan and South China, and to the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. Four subspecies, of which only the nominotypical one occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>121. Prioneris clemanthe clemanthe</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Pieris clemanthe</i>, Doubleday, 1846 <i>a</i>, p. 23 (N. India).</p>

<p><i>Prioneris clemanthe</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 385 ({\female}); Elwes, 1888, p. 411; Moore, 1904, p. 191, pl. 537, figs. 1 1 <i>a-f</i> ({\male}{\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 153; Adamson, 1908, p. 118 (Burma); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 136, t. 57 <i>b</i>, <i>d</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71, pl. viii, fig. B 7.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris helferi</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 161, t. xxv, figs. 10, 11 (imago, Moulmein).</p>

<p><i>Prioneris clemanthe helferi</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 137.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with the veins black, veins 1, 2, and 3 and the cell less darkened than the rest; narrow outer black border, deeply toothed at the veins; costal border and costal apical area dusted with black. Hind wing with the yellow ground-colour of the underside partially invisible through transparency; veins less darkened than on fore wign; a marginal black line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, the veins broadly edged with black; small post-discal black spots on veins 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9. Hind wing yellow; base of area 8 vermilion-red; all the veins jet-black and prominent; a marginal white border from apex to tornus; a marginal black line, heavier posteriorly. Antenn{\ae} and head black, thorax clothed with long bluish-grey hairs, abdomen white; underside of palpi and thorax dusky black, abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the veins heavily blackened and the wing densely dusted with black, more lightly in the discal area. Hind wing with narrow marginal black border and a submarginal black line; veins darker than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing similar to the {\male}, but discal stripes and submarginal spots lighter. Hind wing paler yellow than in the {\male}, the veins heavily black; a submarginal black line, accentuated on the veins; marginal paler yellow spots in areas 3 to 7, the two posterior ones tending to white; the margin black from vein 3 to the tornus or beyond. Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen nearly black, much darker than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>helferi</b> (Feld.).&#x2014;This is much darker. {\male} with hind wing <i>upperside</i> with a narrow black marginal border; fore wing <i>underside</i> with prominent post-discal bars. {\female} with hind wing <i>upperside</i> having a broad black outer border bearing dusky white submarginal spots. This is probably a wet-season form.</p>

<p>The butterfly is found in open country and on the edges of woods; its frequents flowers.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; rare in Sikkim, more common in Assam, the {\female} rare; also extends to South China, Tong-king, and Siam.</p>

<p>Genus <b>ANAPHEIS</b> H\dd{u}bner.</p>

<p><i>Anapheis</i>, H\dd{u}ber, 1819, p. 93; Moore, 1904, p. 158; Bingham, 1907, p. 155; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 137; Klots, 1932, p. 206 (= <i>Belenois</i> subgenus; type, <i>creona</i> Cramer); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 127 (type, <i>creona</i> Cram.); id., 1937, p. 151 (synonymy).</p>

<p><i>Glycestha</i>, Billberg, 1820, p.  76; Scudder, 1875, p. 178 (type, <i>coronea</i> Cramer); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 127 (type, <i>coronea</i> Cram.=<i>java</i> Linn.); id., 1937, p. 151 (a synonym of <i>Anapheis</i> H\dd{u}bn.).</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>A. creona</i> (Cram.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa very slightly arched, nearly straight; apex slightly produced, but more or less obtuse; outer margin slightly convex; tornus obtuse; inner margin sinuous; cell about half length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell well basad, and 10 anastomosed with 11 as a general rule; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>mdc</i> and <i>ldc</i> oblique, the former as long as, or a little longer than, the latter, curved or straight. Hind wing pear-shaped; cell slightly longer than half length of wing; precostal vein fairly long, curved distad from the base. Antenn{\ae} about half length of wing, the club abrupt, broad and slightly flattened; palpi robust, third segment usually slightly longer than the second; eyes naked; legs slender, scaled, without long haris.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>&#x2014;The whole of Africa, Palestine to Asia Minor, Arabia, Persia, <span class="smallcaps">India</span> (except Assam and Burma), <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar Islands, Ceylon,</span> south to the Pacific and Australia. About eight species are known, but only one occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Anapheis aurota</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p>This species is known under the familiar name of <i>mesentina</i> (Cramer).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with a prominent black discocellular spot; a black apical area enclosing some white spots which are sometimes obsolete, but very prominent in the dry-season form. Hind wing with a black marginal border enclosing white spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing yellow or yellowish-white, the veins black; a white-spotted marginal border as on upperside.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, India</span> (except Assam and Burma), <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar Islands</span> to Palestine and Africa. Three subspecies, of which two are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>122 a. Anapheis aurota taprobana</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Pieris taprobana</i>, Moore, 1872, p. 565.</p>

<p><i>Belenois taprobana</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 137, pl. 1iii, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>, 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Ormiston, 1917, p. 139; id., 1924, p. 95.</p>

<p><i>Anapheis taprobana</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 162, pl. 527, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>-2 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Anapheis mesentina taprobana</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 157; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 137, t. 63 <i>f</i>.</p>

<p><i>Belenois mesentina taprobana</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71.</p>

<p><i>Glycestha aurota taprobana</i>, Peile, 1937, p. 53.</p>

<p><i>Belenois fervidior</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1887, p. 326 (Ceylon).</p>

<p>{\male}. Differs from the nominotypical form as follows:&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with deep black apical area, the enclosed white elongate spots more or less obsolete. Hind wing with the black marginal border much broader, the enclosed white spots, except the spot in area 6, very much smaller, somewhat obsolescent, sometimes absent in area 4.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings of a very intense black and broader, the fore wing with the apical spots, the white of the cell, and the anterior half of wing generally overlaid with rich chrome-yellow. Hind wing deep rich chrome-yellow, the submarginal spots subhastate; the spot in area 4 absent.</p>

<p>{\female} Resembles the {\male}, but the apical spots of the fore wing and the submarginal spots of the hind wing are entirely absent.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>; common.</p>

<p><b>122 <i>b</i>. Anapheis aurota aurota</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 140, {\male}; Pl. II, figs. 5, larva, 6, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aurota</i>, Fabricius, 1793, p. 197 (Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Anapheis aurota</i>, Hemming, 1932, p. 283.</p>

<p><i>Glycestha aurota aurota</i>, Peile, 1937, p. 53, pl. vi, fig. 40 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio mesentina</i>, Cramer, 1780, p. 140, pl. cclxx, figs. A, B (Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Pieris mesentina</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 72, pl. xii, figs. 9, 9 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa); Verity, 1908, p. 128, pl. xxvi, figs. 25, 26 ({\male}), pl. xxvii fig. 33 ({\male}), pl. xxix, fig. 12 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Belenois mesentina</i>, Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 575 (early stages and habits, Kanara); Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 590; Evans, 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 199 (Baluchistan).</p>

<p><i>Anapheis mesentina</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 158, pl. 527, fig. 1 (larva, pupa), 1 <i>a, b, c</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>d</i> ({\female}, dry-season form), 1 <i>e</i> ({\female}), 1 <i>f, g, h</i> ({\female}, wet-season form); Bingham, 1907, p. 155, fig. 39 ({\male}); Bell, 1912, p. 1153, pl. i, fig. 60 ({\male}), 60 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (early stages).</p>

<p><i>Anapheis mesentina mesentina</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 137; Hemming, 1932, p. 283  (=primary homonym=<i>aurota</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Belenois mesentina mesentina</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 71.</p>

<p><i>Pieris lordaca</i>, Walker, 1870, p. 48 (Harkeko, Red Sea).</p>

<p><i>Belenois lordaca</i>, Butler, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 375 (Western India); id., 1888 <i>a</i>, pp. 203-4; Yesbury, 1892 <i>a</i>, p. 216.</p>

<p><i>Anapheis mesentina</i> f. <i>lordaca</i>, Fruhstorfer 1910, p. 137.</p>

<p><i>Belenois auriginea</i>, Butler, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 374 (Campbellpore) ({\female}); id., 1888 <i>a</i>, pp. 203-4.</p>

<p>The nominotypical form is that of the wet season, of which <i>auriginea</i> Butler is a synonym. The dry-season form is <i>lordaca</i> Walker.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with costal area to base of vein 11 dusky black; a prominent curved jet-black discocellular bar; a broad black apical area, narrowing to vein 2, its edge anteriorly straight to vein 4, and excurved in area 2; six white spots in the apical area, of which the anterior four are elongate. Hind wing with a marginal black border from veins 2 to 6, bearing four round white spots in areas 2 to 5.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing similar to the upperside, the markings more clearly defined and the apical spots larger. Hind wing yellowish-white, all the veins very broadly bordered with black; border with white spots as on upperside. Fringes white, alternated with black.</p>

<p>The ground-colour on both sides is variable. Upperside often cream-colour; underside sometimes wing, and the whole surface of hind wing varying to rich chrome-yellow.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but the black markings broader, the white apical spots of fore wing often partly obsolete on <i>upperside</i>. Antenn{\ae} in both sexes black, sparsely dotted with white; head, thorax, and abdomen white; thorax above often bluish-grey.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 40-55 mm.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>lordaca</b> (Walk.).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Similar to the wet-season form, but on the <i>upperside</i> the black markings are narrower, the white markings on the apical area of fore wing broder and longer, and on the hind wing the white sub-marginal spots are larger and almost merge with the white ground-colour on the inner side.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the ground-colour almost pure white, on the hind wing slightly yellowish.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1912):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.&#x2014;At first white, turning later to orange.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;1st and 2nd instars oily yellowish-green, with each segment bearing a dorso-lateral hair which carries a globule of liquid at its tip. 3rd instar green, with a broad supra-spiracular purple-brown band. 4th instar greenish-ochreous, witha a broad supraspiracular band mottled with white, the region below it white enamelled with green, brown, and yellow blotches; a dorsal double green line; anal segment with two yellow vitreous tubercles, one on each side of dorsal line; body surface oily-looking, with the usal subdorsal, dorso-lateral, and supraspiracular tubercles, which are yellow, vitreous, and conical, each bearing a short brown hair which may exude a globule of liquid from its tip; a subspiracular tubercle, bearing a longish white hair; also many minute tubercles, each bearing a short fine white hair; a sub-spiracular fringe of rather long fine white hairs. 5th instar resembles the 4th instar; the purple band only dotted with the little white tubercles; the region below the band mottled greenish-brown; the broad greenish-ochreous dorsal colour finishes square at the hind margin of segment 12 or nearly so. Length, 35 mm.; breadth, 4 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Green, with a faint supraspiracular band; top of thoracic carina black behind, yellowish in front; end of snout yellow; the sides black, as also the shoulder-points and teeth of segment 7; tubercles all black; abdomen tinged yellow; wings marked with black; surface of abdomen pittled, Sometimes the colour of the pupa is greyish-bone, in which case the tubercles are bright yellow. Length, 23 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1912).&#x2014;The eggs are laid in clusters, up to 200 in a batch, on the young shoots or the undersides of young leaves. The larv{\ae} eat their way out near the top as a rule, and as often as not do not eat the egg-shell; they herd together during the first stages, but separate in the last; they are much subject to attack by parasites.</p>

<p>Pupation often takes place in company, one close up against the other on a perpendicular surface, or horizontal, on the upperside or underside of a leaf or against a stone or tree-trunk indiscriminately. The females of a brood emerge before the males.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a fairly strong flier; it prefers open places and hot sunshine, and flies low, being fond of resting on the ground with wings closed and, in dull weather, with the fore wings drawn down between in hind wings.</p>

<p><i>Food-plants</i>: Capers. Has been bred on <i>Capparis aphylla</i> Roth., C. <i>sepiaria</i> Linn., C. <i>heyneana</i> Wall., <i>Cadaba indica</i> Lam., and <i>M{\ae}rua arenaria</i> Hook. f. &amp; Thoms.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;All <span class="smallcaps">India</span> except Assam and Burma; common. A straggler is recorded from Great Nicobar. The subspecies also extends to Palestine and Africa.</p>

<p>Genus <b>APPIAS</b> H\dd{u}bner. (Fig. 141, venation).</p>

<p><i>Appias</i>, H\dd{u}ner, 1819, p. 91; Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, pp. 37, 49 (type, <i>zelmira</i> Cramer); id., 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 392; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 134; id., 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 193; Watson, 1894, pp. 497, 523, pl. ii (seasonal forms); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 51; Bingham, 1907, p. 197; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148; Bell, 1912, p. 1136; id., 1913, p. 329; Klots, 1931, p. 256; id., 1932, pp. 208, 209; Dixey, 1932, pp. 62, 73 (plume-scales); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 72; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 126 (type, <i>zelmira</i> Stoll).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 93; Scudder, 1875, p. 136 (type, <i>paulina</i> Craner); Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, pp. 392, 458; Klots, 1932, pp. 208, 209; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 126 (type, <i>paulina</i> Cramer).</p>

<p><i>Hiposcritia</i>, Geyer, 1832, p. 16; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 133 (type, <i>pandione</i> Geyer); Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 392; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 126 (type, <i>pandione</i> Geyer).</p>

<p><i>Tachyris</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 361; Scudder, 1875, p. 274 (type, <i>nero</i> Fabr.); Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, pp. 392, 458.</p>

<p><i>Lade</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1898 <i>b</i>, p. 153 (type, <i>lalassis</i> Gr.-Sm.); Bingham, 1907, p. 216.</p>

<p>Type of the genus, <i>A. zelmira</i> Stoll (=<i>libythea</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa widely arched; apex acute or subacute, slightly rounded or slightly falcate, always more rounded in the {\female} than in the {\male}; outer margin straight; tornus well-marked; inner margin straight of slightly sinuous; cell always a little longer than half the length of the wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell, well basad; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>mdc</i> usually about half as long as <i>ldc</i>. Hind wing more or less broadly pear-shaped; precostal vein long, curved distad from its base; <i>ldc</i> longer than <i>udc</i> or <i>mdc</i>. Antenna{\ae} about half length of fore wing or a little longer; club well marked and flatterned usually abrupt. Palpus with the third segment very slender and pointed, as long as or longer than the second. The {\male}, and sometimes the {\female}, with two long hair-pencils arising from the intersegmental membrane distad of the eighth abdominal segment; these hair-pencils are absent in <i>lalassis</i> Gr.-Sm.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;They are fast fliers. The males congregate in large numbers at wet places. Migratory swarms have often been observed. The female is strongly dimorphic and is usually much rarer than the male.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;The whote Indo-Australian region, extending to South, East, and West China and Africa. The Indian area contains ten species.</p>

<p><i>Key to Males.</i></p>

<p>1. No abdominal hair-pencils</p>

<p><i>lalassis</i> Gr.-Sm., p. 385.</p>

<p>Abdominal hair-pencils present.</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Upperside orange to crimson, veins more or less blackened</p>

<p><i>nero</i> (Fabr.), p. 410.</p>

<p>Upperside never orange to crimson ..</p>

<p>3. Fore wing with <i>mdc</i> placed at right angles to upper edge of cell..</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>Fore wing with <i>mdc</i> placed at an acute angle to upper edge of cell...  ...</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>4. Hind wing underside with a black dot at end of cell, and black marginal dots between the veins. . ... .</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>Hind wing underside without a black dot at end of cell, and no marginal dots between the veins.. ... ..</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>5. Fore wing underside with a large black spot at end of cell... .. ...</p>

<p><i>lalage</i> (Doubl.), p. 387.</p>

<p>Fore wing underside without a large black spot at end of cell, and no detached spot in area 3... ... </p>

<p><i>indra</i> (Moore), p. 390.</p>

<p>6. Hind wing underside yellow, a broad dark chocolate marginal border. ... .</p>

<p><i>lyncida</i> (Cram.), p. 396.</p>

<p>Hind wing underside without a dark chocolate marginal border.. ...</p>

<p><i>libythea</i> (Fabr.), p. 393.</p>

<p>7. Fore wing upperside with marginal black produced inwardly in area 3. .. .</p>

<p>9.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with marginal black not produced inwardly in area 3.</p>

<p>8.</p>

<p>8. Fore wing with apex abtuse, outer margin incurved; underside usually with a post-discal black spot in area 3, apical black usually prominent on upperside.</p>

<p><i>paulina</i> (Cram.), p. 403.</p>

<p>Fore wing with apex acute, outer margin straight; underside without a post-discal black spot in area 3, upperside apical black very narrow or absent. ... ..</p>

<p><i>albina</i> (Boisd.), p. 400.</p>

<p>9. Fore wing underside with a prominent black spot in area 3.... ... </p>

<p><i>leis</i> (H\dd{u}bn.), p. 408.</p>

<p>Fore wing underside without a black spot in area 3, except as part of a black post-discal band which is not always present.</p>

<p><i>wardi</i> (Moore), p. 406.</p>

<p><i>Key to Females.</i></p>

<p>1. Upperside orange to crimson; for wing with black apical area bearing spots of ground-colour. ... </p>

<p><i>nero</i> (Fabr.), p. 410.</p>

<p>Upperside black and white. ... .</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Fore wing upperside without white spots in the black apical area; a prominent spot in the middle of area 3 conjoined with black apical area... ...</p>

<p><i>lalassis</i> Gr.-Sm., p. 385.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with apical area bearing white discal markings. ... ..</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>4. Hind wing underside with a black or brownish discal stipe from vein 2 to veins 5 or 6, and a similar stripe along vein 7, weakly indicated in dry forms. .. ..</p>

<p><i>libythea</i> (Fabr.), p. 393.</p>

<p>Hind wing underside with discal markings from vein 1 <i>a</i> to costa, no stripe along vein 7.. ...</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>5. Fore wing underside with a large black spot at end of cell, sometimes merged with a band crossing wing to base of cell</p>

<p><i>lalage</i> (Doubl.), p. 387.</p>

<p>Fore wing underside without a black spot at end of cell. .. ...</p>

<p><i>indra</i> (Moore), p. 390.</p>

<p>6. Fore wing upperside largely darkened, with white stripes between the veins, some-times a white cell-stripe.. ...</p>

<p><i>lyncida</i> (Cram.), p. 396.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside largely white, with black outer and costal borders</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>7. Hind wing upperside with the marginal black border dentate... l..</p>

<p>8.</p>

<p>Hind wing upperside with the marginal black border not dentate, irregular or straight.</p>

<p><i>lies</i> (H\dd{u}bn.), p. 408.</p>

<p>8. Fore wing upperside with at least 4 sub-apical white spots in areas 3 to 6...</p>

<p>9.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with not more than 3 subapical white spots in areas 4 to 6 (<i>A. p. galathea</i> excepted)... ... </p>

<p><i>paulina</i> (Cram.), p. 403.</p>

<p>9. Fore wing upperside with edge of dark basal</p>

<p><i>albina</i> (Bois.), p. 400.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with edge of dark basal area distinctly straight</p>

<p><i>wardi</i> (Moore), p. 406.</p>

<p><b>123. Appias lalassis</b> Grose-Smith. (Fig. 142, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Appias lalassis</i>, Grose-Smith, 1887 <i>b</i>, p. 265, {\male}; Smith &amp; Kirby, 1889, <i>Pierin{\ae}</i>, pl. ii, figs. 1-3 (\male) (Burmah); Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 395; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 154, {\male}; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 72, 73, {\male}{\female}, pl. viii, fig. B 10.1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Lade lalassis</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1898 <i>b</i>, p. 153; Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 1, pl. 551, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i> ({\male}); Bingham, 1907, p. 216, fig. 54 <i>a</i> ({\male}), <i>b</i> (anal segments); Adamson, 1908, p. 120 ({\male}, Tounggya-Sekkan).</p>

<p><i>Pieris indroides</i>, Honrath, 1889, p. 403 (Perak).</p>

<p><i>Appias lalassis</i> f. <i>indroides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 154.</p>

<p>This species possessess all the characteristics of the genus with the exception of the adbominal hair-penciles, which are absent.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> very pale creamy-white. Fore wing with a black dot on <i>ldc</i>, apical area densely dusted with black; traces of a spot are sometimes found in area 3; <i>mdc</i> forms a right angle with upper edge of cell. Hind wing unmarked except for a trace of a black speak on the discocellulars.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> ground-colour similar to upperside. Fore wing with apical area faintly pink, more or less dusted with black; black spot on <i>ldc</i> more prominent than on upperside; a more or less conspicuous round black spot in the middle of area 3. Hind wing very faintly pink, more or less dusted with black; a distinct black discocellular dot, and similar marginal dots between the veins. Antenn{\ae} dark brown; head with dusky black, thorax with bluish-grey hairs; abdomen black with white lateral scaling; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing with strongly produced apex. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a prominent spot in the middle of area 3 conjoined with the black apical area. Hind wing with black marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 56-75 mm.</p>

<p>Form <i>indroides</i> (Honr.).&#x2014;Fore wing with more extended black dusting.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing yellowish, with reddish-brown dusting.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern Shan States</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Southern Burma</span>; rare. Also found in the Malay Peninsula and Siam.</p>

<p><b>Appias lalage</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with broad black apial area bearing two or three white spots; a black discocellular spot, usually large; a large black spot in the middle of area 3, separated from the marginal black by a white spot; <i>mdc</i> forms a right angle with upper edge of cell.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with a large black discocellular spot, and a spot in area 3 as on upperside. Hind wing with dark transverse markings; a minute black spot on <i>ldc</i>, and marginal black dots between the veins.</p>

<p>{\female}. The black markings on both wings more extended. Fore wing with the discocellular spot joined to the black apical area by a band which usually extends to the base of the cell.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">United Provinces</span>, Mussooree, to <span class="smallcaps">Southern Burma</span>, Tong-King and Hainan, the Malay Peninsula, and Siam. Two subspecies, at least, are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>124 <i>a</i>. Appias lalage lalage</b> (Doubleday). (Fig. 143 <i>a</i>, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris lalage</i>, Doubleday, 1842, p. 76 ({\female}, N. India); id. and Westwood &amp; Hewitson, 1847, pl. vi, fig. 5.</p>

<p><i>Tachyris lalage</i>, Elwes, 1888, p. 419.</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage</i>, Mackinon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 591.</p>

<p><i>Hyposcritia lalage</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 222, pl. 547, figs. 1, 1<i>a</i>-1 <i>f</i> ({\male}{\female}), pl. 548, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>e</i> ({\male}{\female}); Adamson, 1908, p. 119 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 208, 209, fig. 53 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage lalage</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153, t. 59 <i>b</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73, pl. viii, fig. B 10.2 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 54, pl. vii, fig. 58 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris durvasa</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 73; id., 1857 <i>b</i>, p. 103, pl. xliv, fig. 6.</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage durvasa</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153, t. 59 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Catophaga pseudolalage</i>, Moore, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 142 (Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage durvasa</i> f. <i>pseudolalage</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153, t. 59 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Hiposcritia argyridina</i>, Butler, 1885, p. 340 (Manipur).</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage argyridina</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153.</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage durvasa</i> ab. <i>confluens</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with base and basal half of costa densely dusted with black, the latter tinged with yellow; a large black spot on the <i>ldc</i>, usually separated from a black spot in area 3, the latter spot usually merged with the marginal black, cutting off a white submarginal spot in 3; apical third black, bearing two or three white subapical spots; marginal black reaching vein 2. Hind wing with an irregular, somewhat macular outer black border which becomes diffuse inwardly and on the tornus; cilia yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, with  black discocellular spot as on upperside, base of costa, yellowish-green; a heavy post-discal black band which curves from the costal margin to below vein 2, and is widened beyond the apex of the cell; a black spot and a white submarginal spot in area 3 as on upperside; apical area greenish-yellow to ochraceous. Hind wing uniform ochraceous-yellow, the veins brighter yellow; dusky transverse narrow bands, more or less distinct, irregular and complete, or broken up.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with black markings more extended than in the {\male}. Fore wing spical black reaching into the cell and usually extended as a stripe to the base of the cell; marginal black very broad, extending obliquely to the inner margin, sometimes narrowly to the base; a small white tornal spot in addition to the other spots as in the {\male}; anterior subapical spot usually yellow. Hind wing with basal two-thirds white, tinged with yellow chiefly around the base; outer third dusky black that broadens considerably posteriorly to the inner margin, and anteriorly encloses in area 6, sometimes also in 7, an irregular white spot.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with extreme base and lower basal half of cell yellowish-green, rest of cell black, and other black and white areas much as on upperside; apical area as in the {\male}. Hind wing ochraceous-yellow to purplish-white, with heavier submarginal band than in the {\male}, and other markings more distinct. Antenn{\ae} in both sexes black, spotted sparesely with white; head and thorax with turted greenish-yellow hairs, adbomen fuscous; underside of head, thorax, and abdomen yellowish-white.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>argyridina</b> (Butler).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> similar to the wet-season form, but the black markings smaller and more restricted; the bases of both wings with a strong silvery gloss, only weakly shown in the wet form. Fore wing with the spot in area 3 usually free.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with similarly restricted black markings; apex of fore wing and the whole area of the hind wing with the  ochraceous-yellow of a duller tint than in the wet-season form.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> very similar to the {\male} of the wet-season form.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> black markings similar to those in the {\male} of the wet season. Fore wing with upper half of cell yellowish-green, the apex lilacine-brown, dusted with black. Hind wing uniform lilacine-brown densely dusted with black, with a tendency to the formation of a broad transverse patch across the middle area of the wing. Some specimens have the fore wing tinged with yellow, and a basal yellow tinge on the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-80 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>pseudolalage</b> (Moore).&#x2014;The black markings are still further reduced, the discocellular spot is very small, and the hind wing is without black markings on the upperside.</p>

<p>{\male} form <b>confluens</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;The black discocellular spot on the fore wing is united with the marginal black.</p>

<p>The name <i>durvasa</i> Moore applies to the wet form and is therefore a synonym of the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">United Provinces</span>, Mussooree, to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Tavoy; not rare.</p>

<p><b>124 b. Appias lalage lagela</b> (Moore). (Fig. 143 <i>b</i>, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga lagela</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 838, pl. 52, fig. 4 ({\female}, Tenas-serim).</p>

<p><i>Hyposcritia lagela</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 225, pl. 548, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>-2 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}); Adamson, 1908, p. 119 (Upper Tenasserim).</p>

<p><i>Appias lalage lagela</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 208, 209, fig. 53 <i>b</i> ({\male}); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73; Peile, 1937, p. 55.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a dark band as in the {\female} of the nominotypical form. Hind wing with black marginal border continuous, not macular but inwardly diffuse.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the cell anteriorly shaded with dusky black; apical area yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to the nominotypical {\female} of the wet season. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with marginal black not continued along inner margin; the connecting bar between the marginal black and the black in the cell is narrowed by a triangular emargination of its lower edge at the base of area 3.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with black marginal area not reaching the tornus, and the black area in cell is separated from the marginal black by the basal third of area 3, which is entirely white; apical area pearly-white tinged with purple. Hind wing as in the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Mergui Archipelago</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Southern Burma</span>; rare. Also found in the Malay Peninsula and Siam.</p>

<p><b>Appias indra</b> (Moore).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with broad black apical area, produced inwards in area 3; marginal black reaching vein 2; two to five white spots in the black area; no detached black spot in area 3; <i>mdc</i> forms a right angle with upper edge of cell. Hind wing with or without a narrow marginal black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing without a discocellular black spot, and no spot in area 3; apical ochraceous area bordered with brownish-black. Hind wing with variable ground-colour and more or less distinct transverse bands which are complete or interrupted; a minute black discocellular spot, and similar marginal spots between the veins.</p>

<p>{\female}. Black markings more extensive, especially on the hind wing. Fore wing upperside with two white subapical spots.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, India</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to Hainan, South China, and Formosa, south to the Malay Peninsula and Lombok, Borneo, and Palawan. Three subspecies are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>125 <i>a</i>. Appias indra narendra</b> Moore. (Fig. 144 <i>b</i>, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Appias narendra</i>, Moore, 1877 <b>b</b>, p. 48 ({\male}, Ceylon); id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 134, pl. 51, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i>, 4 <b>b</b> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Hyposcritia narendra</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 228, pl. 550, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>i</i> ({\male}{\female}); Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 393.</p>

<p><i>Appias indra narendra</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 206, 207, fig. 52 <i>b</i>; Fruhstorfer,1910, p. 153; Ormiston, 1924, p. 96; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73, pl. viii, fig. B 10.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with two white subapical spots in the broad black apical area. Hind wing with narrow outer marginal black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the black subapical band as wide as the pale apical area.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing black, with the base of area 4 white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing more densely dusted with black than in the nominotypical race.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i>.&#x2014;The difference between the seasonal forms is less maked than in the nominotypical race.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with the outer margin bordered with black, though often narrowly.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the nominotypical race, but the shade of brown on the apex of fore wing and over the hind wing is darker, the dusting of black scales more dense, the black post-discal band on fore wing broader.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> differs from the wet-season form only in the width of the marginal black on the hind wing, which is about half as wide as in wet-season specimens.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 60-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, 2,000-4,000 feet; rare.</p>

<p><b>125 <i>b</i>. Appias indra shiva</b> (Swinhoe).</p>

<p><i>Hyposcritia shiva</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 138. pl. ix, figs. 1, 2; Moore, 1886, p. 49; Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 393.</p>

<p><i>Appias indra shiva</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 152, t. 59 <i>d</i>; Yates, 1930, p. 833; id., 1931, p. 1006 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73.</p>

<p><i>Appias indra statilia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 153, t. 59 <i>d</i> (as <i>narendra</i>) (Nilgiris and Travancore).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Smaller than <i>narendra</i> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with narrower apical black; apex more pointed than in <i>narendra</i>. Hind wing without a black marginal border in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing paler greyish-brown than in <i>narendra</i>.</p>

<p>Specimens with broader black apical area, resembling <i>narendra</i>, are  form <b>statilia</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>; not frequent.</p>

<p>According to Yates (1930 <i>a</i>) it is abundant in Coorg in some seasons.</p>

<p><b>125 <i>c</i>. Appias indra indra</b> (Moore). (Fig. 144 <i>a</i>, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris indra</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 74 (N. India); id., 1857 <i>b</i>, p. 103, pl. xliv, fig. 5 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Tachyris indra</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 381 ({\male}); Elwes, 1888, p. 419.</p>

<p><i>Hyposcritia indra</i>, Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 372; Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 392; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 226, pl. 549, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>h</i> ({\male}{\female}); Adamson, 1908, p. 119 ({\male}, Burma).</p>

<p><i>Appias indra</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 205, fig. 52 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias indra indra</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 152, t. 59 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73.</p>

<p><i>Appias mahana</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>b</i>, p. 48 (Darjeeling).</p>

<p><i>Appias indra indra</i> f. <i>mahana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 152, t. 59 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Hyposcritia imbecilis</i>, Moore, 1884, p. 46 (Silhet).</p>

<p><i>Tachyris indigis</i>, Weymer, 1887, p. 11, pl. i, fig. 3 (N. India).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>&#x2014; <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with the base and basal half of costa thickly dusted with black; a minute black discocellular spot; apical and marginal area to costal half and vein 2 broadly black, the inner edge of this area produced inwards in area 3; three subapical white spots. Hind wing white, with a discocellular black dot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; costa at base pea-green; a post-discal broad oblique black stripe that reaches the outer margin and extends to vein 2; apical area yellowish, obscurely dusted with black. Hind wing pale yellow, with very obscurely post-discal white patches; the whole wing dusted sparsely with black; discocellular black spot more or less conspicuous.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with basal area densely dusted with black. Apical and marginal black are avery broad, anteriorly reaching nearly to the cell, posteriorly extending in a broad stripe along the inner margin to the base, in area 2 narrower owing to a projection of the ground-colour; two suapical white spots. Hind wing dusky black, mearing in the basal half to diffuse dusky grey; two or more small anterior submarginal white spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the {\male}. Fore wing with the basal yellowish-green more extended; post-discal black band much broader and produced inwards along the inner margin for a short distance; apical area greenish-yellow, with an obscure series of pearly-white patches between it and the black band; a similar short tornal streak. Hind wing differs from that of the {\male} in the deeper yellow ground-colour, which, however, is similarly dusted with black and marked with black bars; a conspicuous submarginal series of pearly-white patches.</p>

<p>An intermediate form of the {\female} is common in which the black areas on both wings are much restricted; on the hind wing it is reduced to a marginal border which spreads diffusely inwards and obscurely encloses a submarginal series of white diamond-shaped spots.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} in both sexes black, chequered with white; head and thorax with bluish-grey haris; abdomen black with sparse white scaling; underside of head, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>mahana</b> Moore.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with the black areas much restricted.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with post-discal black band very short, often diffuse and obscure; apical area of fore wing and the entire hind wing light earth-brown, more or less densely dusted with black, on the hind wing the black dusting forming ill-defined zigzig markings.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> similar to that of the {\male}, the black on the fore wing of somewhat greater extent; hind wing with outer margin obscurely dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the {\male}, the post-discal black band on fore wing broader.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} in both sexes dark brown; head with ochraceous-brown, thorax with bluish-grey hairs, abdomen blackish; underside of head, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; {\male} not rare, {\female} scarce. Also extends to Hainan and South China, the Malay Peninsula, and Cochin-China.</p>

<p><b>Appias libythea</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p>{\male}. A character given by Evans (1932 <i>a</i>) will be found very useful for separating the {\male} from similar-looking specimens of <i>albina</i> and <i>paulina</i>; <i>mdc</i> of fore wing is placed at right angels to upper edge of cell. Fore wing with the apex produced; outer margin never crenulate; apical area with the veins black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the veins in the apical and outer marginal areas black. Hind wing veins more or less darkened; no black discocellular dot; a brownish-black transverse stripe from vein 2 to veins 5 or 6, and a similar stripe along vein 7.</p>

<p>{\female}. Black markings extended. Fore wing with a black stripe almost filling the cell and joined to the distal black by a narrow stripe along vein 4.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.&#x2014;Shaped like a short-necked bottle, and with ten longitudinal ribs; a narrow ring of five teeth at the top. Pearl-white when first laid, becoming orange later.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Body covered with minute, short, erect hairs; the main tubercles represented by small white spots each bearing a slightly longer fine hair; some longer, fine, whitish hairs along the dorso-ventral line beneath the spiracles. The body is rather light yellowish-green, and, with the exception of the head and venter, is closely blotched with light purplish spots. Length, 30 mm.; breadth, 4 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Light green, often with a brownish shade; a lateral abdominal row of black spots, and a subdorsal row of yellow ones. Head retracted under segment 2, and with snout of moderate length; segment 2 with a small lateral rounded knob. Length, 18 mm.; breadth, 6 mm. at shoulders.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly, nearly always on a young shoot or on the upper surface of a leaf. The larva eats the egg-shell and rests along the midrib of the leaf. It is much parasitized. It feeds on Capparidace{\ae}, e. g., <i>Crat{\ae}va religiosa</i> Forst. f., <i>Capparis separia</i> Linn. Pupation takes place on a leaf or branch of the food-plant. The growth is rapid, sometimes not more than twenty days elapsing from the laying of the egg to the emergence of the imago.</p>

<p>The butterfly has a strong, quick, and fairly straight flight. It comes sparingly to flowers, and generally rests on a leaf at some distance from the ground. The males sometimes come to wet places in numbers, the females hardly ever. Although a typical butterfly of the plains, it is by no means confined to open country. The females vary much with the season, and the darker ones are more common in the hot weather.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, India, Burma, Nicobar Islands</span>, extending to Hainan, the Malay Peninsula, and North Philippines. Two subspecies, including the nominotypical one, are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>126 <i>b</i> Appias libythea libythea</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 145<i>a</i>, <i>b</i>).</p>

<p><i>Papilio libythea</i>, Fabricius, 1775, p. 471 (Ceylon); Donovan, 1800, pl. xxiii, fig. 3.</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 134, pl. 52, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}); Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 358; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 573; Watson, 1890 <i>a</i>, p. 268; id., 1894, pp. 497-8; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898 <i>b</i>, p. 591; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 203, pl. 542, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, 2 <i>b</i>, 3, 3 <i>a</i>, 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 200; Bell, 1913, p. 331; Ormiston, 1924, p. 97; Yates, 1930 (b), p. 834 ({\female} variation); id., 1931, p. 1006.</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea libythea</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148, t. 58 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73; Peile, 1937, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Papilio zelmira</i>, Stoll, 1780, p. 64, pl. cccxx, figs. C, D ({\female}, ndia).</p>

<p>Appias zelmira, Swinhoe, 1893, p. 309; Watson, 1894, p. 497, pl. ii, figs. 1-5; Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 200, pl. 542, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea zelmira</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 201.</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea</i> f. <i>zelmira</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 149, t. 58 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias areas</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 138 ({\male}, S. India).</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea</i> {\female} f. <i>ares</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148, t. 58 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias retexta</i>, Swinhoe, 1890, p. 360 ({\male}{\female}, Poona).</p>

<p><i>Calophaga swinhoei</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 11, pl. 556, fig. 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}) (S. India).</p>

<p><i>Appias wardi yaksha</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 157 (Poona).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> pure white. Fore wing with costa, apex, and outer margin anteriorly very narrowly shaded with dusky black, this colour produced very finely along the veins for a short distance; the rest of the veins white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pure white, the black colour merely indicated along the costa and at the apex.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing without pale spots in the distal black border; cell largely black; costa, apical area, and outer margin brodly black; the black in the cell joined to the marginal black along vein 4, leaving a short, oval, oblique bar of the ground-colour beyond the cell; the marginal black narrows posteriorly, and its inner edge is irregular; posterior inner area with a somewhat diffuse dusky black streak from base, narrowed distally and not reaching the marginal black. Hind wing with outer margin more or less broadly black; a dusky shading that forms a diffuse subcostal streak from the base, and another more diffuse obscure discal streak that leaves between it and the dark margin a series of, posteriorly, very ill-defined markings of the white ground-colour, which decrease in size up to area 6.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white, with similar, but more diffuse, markings. Fore wing with the marginal black interrupted by a series of white streaks between the veins. Hind wing with marginal black scaling very faint; basal and discal dusky shading as on upperside, but more or less obsolescent. Antenn{\ae} in both sexes dusky black, obscurely spotted with white; head, thorax, and abdomen bluish-white above, white beneath.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>ares</b> Swinhoe.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the black markings reduced. <i>Underside</i> markings faint, more brownish, the ground-colour ochraceous.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with black markings restricted to the upper half of cell, and on the costa, apical area, and outer margin are altogether much narrower than in the wet-season form. Hind wing with markings restricted to a narrow macular outer border, with mere indications of a dusky detached discal streak.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with apex of fore wing and whole of hind wing of an ochraceous tint; the black markings of the upperside show through by transparency.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, Peninsular India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Punjab</span>; not common.</p>

<p><b>126 <i>b</i>. Appias libythea olferna</b> Swinhoe.</p>

<p><i>Appias olferna</i>, Swinhoe, 1890, p. 358 (Upper Bengal); Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 201, pl. 542, figs. 1 <i>d, e</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>f</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea</i> f. <i>olferna</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 149.</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea olferna</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 73, pl. viii, fig. B 10.4 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Appias irvini</i>, Swinhoe, 1890, p. 359 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea</i> f. <i>irvini</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148, t. 58 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias zelmira</i>, Adamson (<i>non</i> Stoll), 1908, p. 118 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Appias libythea</i> f. <i>sopara</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. A larger race than the preceding. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a black submarginal line between which and the margin, above vein 3, the veins are heavily blackened.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pale yellow-brown to white. Fore wing with the veins blackened in the apical area. Hind wing with vein 8, the median vein, and vein 7 darkened; veins darkened beyond the cell.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing with the veins more broadly darkened; a broad yellowish discal band.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>irvini</b> Swinhoe.&#x2014;{\male}. Black markings much reduced, especially on the hind wing underside.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with prominent white submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bengal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; <span class="smallcaps">Car Nicobar</span>; not common. Also extending to Hainan and the Malay Peninsula. According to Adamson (1908) the insect is common in central Burma.</p>

<p><b>Appias lyncida</b> (Cramer, 1777).</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing narrowed at the apex; <i>mdc</i> forms a right angle with upper edge of cell. Both wings with an outer marginal black border, more or less dentate on its inner edge.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with a brownish-black costal and outer marginal border, broad in the apical area where there is a yellow subapical spot. Hind wing yellow, with a broad chocolate-brown marginal border.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing dusky black; prominent white stripes in areas 1 <i>b</i>, 2, 4, and 5. Hind wing largely dusky black with whitish discal area.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white.</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913, as observed in <i>latifasciata</i> Moore):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.&#x214;Bottle-shaped, with eleven or twelve longitudinal ribs which are finely transversely striated; an apical crown of five or six teeth. Light green when laid, turning quickly to orange.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Surface of body with the usuall seven parallel lines to each segment, the interspaces between each two lines being occupied by a single row of shiny black tubercles, each row reaching down each side as far as the subspiracular yellow line or narrow band; tubercles on head and on segments 2 to 4 larger than the others; body covered somewhat profusely with erect, minute, fine hairs; spiracles large, oval, white. Colour, dark yellowish-green with a yellow dorsal line, and subspiracular yellow narrow band. Length, 30 mm.; breadth, 4 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Snout long, laterally compressed, the tip much turned up and attenuated. Light green or brownish, with a lateral row of black dots; thoracic carina yellow on the top; snout black on upperside; a black dorsal mark near the front margin of segments 9 to 12; underside withish. Length, 18 mm.; breadth, 6 mm. at shoulders.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;The eggs are laid in batches of from 4 to 12 and more, on yound shoots or on the uppersides of leaves. The larv{\ae} are gregarious until full-grown. The time from the laying of the eggs to the emergence of the imago is about three weeks. The larv{\ae} are attacked by parasites.</p>

<p>The butterfly is not nearly so common in the plains as in the hills. It is a strong flier, but keeps near the ground, often resting on it. Not often seen at flowers, but congregates at wet spots in the not weather, and sometimes in such numbers as to nearly obscure the landscape when put up suddenly in a narrow stream. Has been bred upon <i>Crat{\ae}va religiosa</i> Forst. f., family Capparidace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular Insia</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Burma</span>, and th e<span class="smallcaps">Nicobar Islands</span>, extending to the Loo Choo Islands, the Malay Peninsula, and Philippines to Celebes and Timor.</p>

<p><b>127 <i>a</i>. Appias lyncida taprobana</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Appias taprobana</i>, Moore, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 143 (Ceylon); id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 135, pl. 52, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}, larva, pupa); id., 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 198, pl. 541, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>-2 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}); Ormiston, 1924, p. 98.</p>

<p><i>Appias hippo taprobana</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 205.</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida taporbana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74; Peile, 1937, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Appias vacans</i>, Moore (<i>non Butler</i>), 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 135, pl. 52, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Appias aperta</i>, Butler, 1886 <i>c</i>, p. 188 (Ceylon); Moore, 1887, p. 532.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with very broad black marginal borders, strongly dentate on the inner edge.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing deep ochraceous, veins 6 to 8 blackened.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with white stripes well developed, and cell-stripe prominent.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>aperta</b> Butl.&#x2014;{\male}. Black markings reduced. Hind wing <i>underside</i> pale yellow, dark marginal border reaches vein 6.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with extended creamy-white areas. Hind wing with sharply-defined black marginal border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the {\male}, the edge of the marginal border dentate.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>; rare.</p>

<p><b>127 <i>b</i>. Appias lyncida latifasciata</b> Moore. (Pl. II, figs. 3, larva, 4, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Appias latifasciata</i>, Moore, 1881, <i>b</i>, p. 312 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga latifasciata</i>, Watson, 1894, p. 501.</p>

<p><i>Appias latifasciata</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 199, pl. 541, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 3 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida latifasciata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148; Yates, 1931, p. 1006; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74; Peile, 1937, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Appias hippodes</i>, Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken (<i>non</i> Moore), 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 574 (early stages and habits).</p>

<p><i>Appias hippo</i>, Bell (<i>non</i> Cramer), 1913, p. 334, pl. i, fig. 18 (larva), 18 <i>a</i> (pupa).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with the dark marginal borders narrow, and dentate on the inner edge.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with dark marginal border very broad, reaching the the end of the cell; veins 6 to 8 prominently blackened, and a black stripe in the basal half of area 6.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to <i>taprobana</i>. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the white areas more or less coalescent.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with very broad, dark marginal border.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form.</i>&#x2014;Not very different from specimens of the wet season; black areas reduced, and hind wing <i>underside</i> paler and veins 6 to 9 not blackened; the narrower marginal border only extends to vein 6.</p>

<p>{\female} with fore wing <i>upperside</i> prominently white; hind wing with sharply defined black marginal border; otherwise as in <i>operta</i> Butl.</p>

<p>This race is only slightly differentiated from the Ceylon one.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>, up to 4,000 feet; rare.</p>

<p><b>127 <i>c</i>. Appias lyncida eleonora</b> (Boisduval). (Fig. 146, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris eleonora</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 481 (``Amboina").</p>

<p><i>Appias eleonora</i>, Butler, 1872, p. 47 (Silhet; Moulmein).</p>

<p><i>Appias vacans</i>, Butler, 1870 <i>c</i>, p. 490 (Sikkim); id., 1869-74, p. 90, pl. xxxiv, figs. 5, 6 ({\female}); Moore, 1886, p. 49 (Mergui Islands); id., 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 196, pl. 541, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b, c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida hippoides</i> f. <i>vacans</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148, t. 58 <i>d</i> (as <i>epic{\ae}na</i>).</p>

<p><i>Appias hippoides</i> Moore, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 312 (N.E. Bengal); id., 1886, p. 49 (Mergui Islands); id., 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 194, pl. 540, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b, c</i> ({\female}), 1 <i>d, e</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>f, g</i> ({\female}); Adamson, 1908, p. 118 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga hippoides</i>, Watson, 1894, p. 501.</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida hippoides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148, t. 58 <i>d</i> (as <i>hippo</i>); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74, pl. viii, fig. B 10.5 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 56.</p>

<p><i>Appias hippoides</i> var. <i>epic{\ae}na</i>, Swinhoe, 1889, p. 398.</p>

<p><i>Appias hippo</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Cramer), 1907, p. 203.</p>

<p><i>Appieas lyncida hippoides</i> {\female} f. <i>lurida</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white; along the costal border of fore wing and the dark border of hind wing a bluish flush due to the dark border of underside showing through. Fore wing with costal area dusted with black, more densely over the basal half; marginal black border dentate; subcostal vein and veins anterior to vein 6 black. Hind wing marginal border feebly dentate.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; costal area more or less densely dusted with black, expanding to a broad black apical area and continued as a marginal border, narrowing to the tornus, the border dentate as on upperside; a subapical yellow or white oval spot in area 6. Hind wing sulphur-yellow, the dark marginal border much wider than on the upperside, and still less dentate. Antenn{\ae} black, sparingly dotted with white; head, thorax, and abdomen white, with a bluish tinge.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dusky blackish-brown. Fore wing with short somewhat broad, white streaks in areas 1, 2, 4, and 5, these streaks very variable in width and length. Hind wing with basal half and inner area broadly white, variable in extent and merging into the dark distal area.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing similar to the upperside, the white streaks much broader and longer; a dusky white cell-stripe; base dusted with yellow; apex with a large diffuse purplish patch. Hind wing with basal two-thirds pale sulphur-yellow; apical third dusky brownish-black, the margins of the two colours fairly sharply defined; veins black in the discal area.</p>

<p>Females with yellow instead of white areas on the fore wing upperside are called <b>lurida</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>vacans</b> Butl.&#x2014;{\male}. Smaller than the wet-season form, the black marginal borders narrower.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male} of the wet season, but the fore wing with a broad continuous costal stripe; marginal black dentate.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> closely resembles the wet season {\male}, the fore wing without a subapical spot. Many intermediate forms are found between the extreme dry and wet forms of {\female}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, extending to Hainan, Tong-king, Siam, and Annam; common.</p>

<p>The description given by Boisduval fits this form very well. No form of this species has so far been found in the Moluccas.</p>

<p><b>127 <i>d</i>. Appias lyncida nicobarica</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Appias nicobarica</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 198.</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida nicobarica</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 148; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74.</p>

<p><i>Appias hippo andrea</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Erscholtz), 1907, p. 205.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the subapical spot white. Hind wing pale yellow, the veins not darkened.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with the distal area greenish.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Car Nicobar</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Central Nicobar Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p><b>127 <i>e</i>. Appias lyncida galbana</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida nicobarica</i> {\female} f. <i>galbana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 149.</p>

<p><i>Appias lyncida galbana</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74.</p>

<p>{\male}. Hind wing <i>upperside</i> with the dark marginal border much wider than in the preceding race.</p>

<p>{\female}. Much darkened. Fore wing <i>upperside</i> with the light areas olive or greenish. Hind wing light or dark yellow.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Nicobar Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p><b>Appias albina</b> (Boisduval, 1836).</p>

<p>This species is so similar in both sexes to <i>paulina</i> (Cram.) that some experience of both species is necessary for a correct determination. Some specimens of the dry-season {\male} are often like some males of <i>libythea</i> (Fabr.), but may be easily distinguished by the position of the <i>mdc</i> of fore wing, which makes an acute angle with the upper edge of the cell. Yates (1932, p. 698) tabulates a number of characters by which the Indian <i>albina</i> {\male} may be distinguished from <i>libythea</i> {\male}.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore iwng with apex acute; outer margin straight; upper angle of cell streongly acute; black scaling at the apex and base either narrow or absent, nospot in area 3.</p>

<p>{\female} white. Fore wing with costal and outer margins bordered with black, the apical area much broader; the ground-colour extends nearest the margin in area 2, where its edge is excurved; apical area with at least four white subapical spots in areas 3 to 6; basal area densely dusted with black, the edge of this area distinctly incurved. Hind wing with a marginal narrow black border, dentate on its inner edge.</p>

<p>The species is subject to seasonal variation, which is more marked in the {\female}. The {\female} is polymorphic, and three forms are found in the Indian area. The butterfly is often common, and frequents flowers.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;China and <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, south and east to Australia and the Papuan region. One subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>128. Appias albina darada</b> (C &amp; R. Felder). (Fig. 147, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris darada</i>, C &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 166 (Silhet).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga darada</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 12, pl. 557, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), <i>b, c</i> ({\female}, wet form), <i>d</i> ({\male}, type), <i>e, f</i> ({\female}, dry form), <i>g</i> ({\male}), <i>h, i</i> ({\female}. extreme dry form); Adamson, 1908, p. 120 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Appias melania darada</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155.</p>

<p><i>Appias albina darada</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74, pl. viii, fig. B 10.6 ({\male}); Yates, 1932, p. 698.</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina darada</i>, Peile, 1937, p. 56, pl. xxi, figs. 206, 207 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias neombo</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Boisd.), 1881 <i>a</i>, pl. 50, figs. 3 <i>a, b</i> ({\female}) (=<i>principalis</i> Fruhst.).</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina</i>, Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville (<i>non</i> Cramer), 1887 <i>a</i>, p. 432 (Tavoy, Siam).</p>

<p><i>Appias albina</i> {\female} f. <i>flava</i>, Rober, 1891, p. 282 (Wetter Island).</p>

<p><i>Appias albina</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Boisd.), 1907, p. 212.</p>

<p><i>Appias albina confusa</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p.154, t. 60 <i>d</i> (Sikkim, Assam, Siam, Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Appias albina confusa</i> {\female} f. <i>principalis</i>, Fruhstofer, 1910, p. 154.</p>

<p><i>Appias albina confusa</i> {\female} f. <i>semiflava</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 154.</p>

<p><i>Appias albina</i> {\female} f. <i>norma</i>, Evans, 1924, p. 971 (Ceylon); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74 (=<i>principalis</i> Fruhst.).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with black apical and sometimes marginal scaling, absent in dry-season apecimens. Hind wing unmarked.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the apical area of fore wing and the whole hind wing pale dull ochraceous, this colour much paler in dry-season apecimens.</p>

<p>{\female} form <span class="smallcaps">principalis</span> Fruhstorfer.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> white, the black areas wider in wet-season specimens; white subapical spots large, or partly merged with the ground-colour, in dry-season specimens.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with a narrow post-discal black band, which is irregular and defines the edge of the marginal black of the upperside, this band becoming narrower and more diffuse in dry-season specimens; apical are bluish-white; a costal basal stripe of greenish-yellow dusting more or less oblique, and narrowing distally. Hind wing bluish-white.</p>

<p>{\female} form <i>Semiflava</i> fruhst.&#x2014;Resembles <i>principalis</i>, but the <i>underside</i> of hind wing and of the apical area of fore wing are wich yellow.</p>

<p>{\female} form <i>flava</i> R\dd{o}b.&#x2014;Markings as in the previous form. <i>Upperside</i> yellow.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with apical area yellow as on upperside, the proximal area of wing sulphur-yellow. Hind wing yellow as on upperside.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 60-75 mm.</p>

<p>The white form <i>principalis</i> Fruhst. is more frequent during the dry season, but all three forms occur in both seasons, and with corresponding variations in the extent of the black markings and size of the subapical spots. The form <i>flava</i> R\dd{o}ber is more common in Ceylon, but does occur in S. India, being absent from Sikkim and Burma.</p>

<p>The name <i>Swinhoei</i> (Moore), usually associated with this species, was founded upon a {\male} of <i>libythea</i> (Fabr.) belonging to the dry form <i>ares</i> Swinh.</p>

<p>A {\female} from Car Nicobar, in the collection of Colonel Ferrar, resembles the form <i>neombo</i> (Boisduval), from the Malay Peninsula, in having a detached black spot in area 3 of the fore wing, but has no subapical spots.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;``Light green with a yellow-white spiracular band from segments 2 and 3 to segment 12, where the band expands somewhat. Head round, shining, yellow covered with small conical setiferous black tubercles; body rugose, with six transverse rows, from above the spiracular region over the dorsum, of small, shining, setiferous, conical black tubercles to each segment; segments 2, 12, and 13 have only a few transverse rows of such tubercles."</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;``Dirty whitish, with a pink shade on segments 4 to 14. The head-process from between the eyes is long, flattened at the sides, slightly curved, pointed at the extremity edges on ventral surface minutely serrate. The front margin of segment 2 is produced into a small subdorsal tooth, and the dorsal line is rather strongly carinate; thorax highly carinate on the dorsal line; lateral teeth of segments 6, 7, and 8 are all of the same size and are pointed; the head production, the points on segment 2, the teeth on segments 6 and 7 (sometimes) and the extremity of the cremaster black'' (after <i>de Nic\'eville</i>).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Burma</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>; not common as a rule; rare in Sikkim. According to Yates (1930) it is very common in Coorg.</p>

<p><b>Appias paulina</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with the apex obtuse, outer margin gently incurved between veins 6 and 3. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with apical and marginal black scaling, sometimes with a narow marignal black border, these black markings much reduced or absent in dry-season specimens; a black spot often present in area 3, more often onthe underside, and in Indian speciments rarely found except in the Nicobar race.</p>

<p>{\female}. Closely resembles <i>albina</i> (Boisd.) {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing (except in the Nicobar race) with not more than three subapical white spots in areas 4 to 6; basal dark area with its edge almost straight.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the post-discal black band broader than in <i>albina</i>, anteriorly reaching, or nearly reaching, the base of area 5; apical area white in the dry-season form, yellow in the wet-season form. Hind wing as the apical area of fore wing according to season.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon; Nicobar</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>, south and east to North New Guinea, and north to the Riu Kiu Islands. Two subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>129 <i>a</i>. Appias paulina paulina</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio paulina</i>, Cramer, 1777, p. 21, pl. cx, figs. E, F ({\female}, Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga paulina</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 7, pl. 554, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>g</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 210; Ormiston, 1924, p. 97.</p>

<p><i>Appias melania paulina</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155.</p>

<p><i>Pieris galene</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 165.</p>

<p><i>Catophaga galene</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 132, pl. li, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); id., 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 9. pl. 555, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\male} type), 1 <i>e, f, g, k, j</i> ({\female}), figs. 1 <i>c, d, h, i</i> ({\male}\female}, wet-season form).</p>

<p><i>Appias melania paulina</i> f. <i>galene</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155.</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina galene</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74; Peile, 1937, p. 57.</p>

<p><i>Catophaga lankapura</i>, Moore, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 142 ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon); id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 133, pl. 1, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i> ({\male}), pl. li, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}, wet season).</p>

<p><i>Appias melania paulina</i> f. <i>lankapura</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155.</p>

<p><i>Catophaga venusta</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 132, pl. 132, pl. li, fig. 3 ({\female}, Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Appias albina venusta</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 154.</p>

<p><i>Appias melania paulina</i> f. <i>fasciata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155, t. 61 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>lankapura</b> (Moore).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the costa, apex, and outer margin more or less densely dusted with black, this black scaling narrowed on the margin posteriorly and not reaching the tornus. Hind wing with light black dusting alon ginner margin, on tornus, and along posterior part of outer margin.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with apical area pale yellow. Hind wing entirely pale yellow. </p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing white; basal area up to as far as two-thirds of the cell dusted with black, which gives that part a bluish-grey appearance, the edge of this area straight; costa and apical area broadly black; the inner edge of this black area is irregularly curved, extended inwards and forming a right angle on vein 3, invaded deeply by the ground-colour in area 2, below which it is more or less oblique and even, to the inner margin near tornus; three subapical, more or kess yellowish spots in areas 4 to 6. Hind wing pale yellow; outer margin with broad black border dentate on inner edge; base and areas 1 and 2 dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with basal area dusted with pale yellow; apical area rich chrome-yellow. Hind wing rich chrome-yellow, base greeenish. Antenn{\ae} black, speckled with white dots; frons and thorax with dusky greyish-green hairs; abdomen blackish; underside of thorax yellow, of abdomen white.</p>

<p>Form <b>fasciata</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;Hind wing <i>underside</i> with a submarginal black band.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>paulina</b> (Cram.) (=<i>galene</i> Feld., <i>venusta</i> Moore).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with sparse black dusting which is often quite absent.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with apex of fore wing and entire hind wing dull ochraceous.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> resembles the wet form, but fore wing with narrower black area; hind wing with narrower and more sharply dentate black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with apex of fore wing and entire hind wing pearly bluish white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 55-75 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>; not rare. Occurs up to 6,000 feet, usually at the edges of woods, and has a rapid and long-sustained flight.</p>

<p><b>129 <i>b</i>. Appias paulina galathea</b> (Felder).</p>

<p><i>Pieris galathea</i>, C. Felder, 1862, p. 485 (Sambelong).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga paulina</i> var. <i>galathea</i>, Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 237.</p>

<p><i>Catophaga galathea</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 6, pl. 553, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>g</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias galathea</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 211.</p>

<p><i>Appias melania galathea</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155, t. 60 <i>d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina galahtea</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75 (text only).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga roepstorfi</i>, Moore, 1884, p. 44 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> creamy-white. Fore wing with a very slight dusting of black along costal margin, at apex and for a very short distance down outer margin; a round, black, post-discal spot in area 3, variable in size and sometimes only indicated; cilia anteriorly dusky black, posteriorly white. Hind wing unmarked; cilia yellowish posteriorly.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; basal half of cell sulphur-yellow; costa narrowly and apical area ochraceous or butter-yellow; spot in area 3 more clearly defined. Hind wing butter-yellow. Antenn{\ae} brown speckled with white; hairs on head and thorax anteriorly dusky greenish-yellow, on thorax posteriorly bluish, scaling of abdomen white; underside of head and thorax very pale yellow, of abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female}. In both seasonal forms almost identical with <i>paulina</i>, but on the <i>upperside</i> the fore wing has always four or five (not two or three as in <i>paulina</i>) subapical white spots, whilst on the <i>underside</i> the oblique, curved, black band that crosses the fore wing is slightly narrower, and its outer margin more irregular.</p>

<p>The {\female} exists in four forms, which resemble those found in <i>A. albina darada</i> Feld. As no <i>albina</i> males have been found on the Nicobar Islands it may be assumed that these females all belong to <i>galathea</i>.</p>

<p>Form <b>galathea</b> (Felder).&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with apical area stone-white, the rest of the wing, excepting area 1 <i>a</i> and part of 1 <i>b</i>, sulphur-yellow. Hind wing entirely stone-white.</p>

<p>Form <b>flava</b> R\dd{o}ber.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> yellow. Underside of fore wing as in <i>galathea</i> except that the apical area is yellow. Hind wing entirely yellow.</p>

<p>Form <b>semiflava</b> Fruhstorfer.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> white; hind wing may be tinged yellow, usually at costa and inner area.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in <i>flava</i>, but the sulphur-yellow area of fore wing restricted to the cell. (See figure in Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, pl. 553, figs. 1 <i>b, c</i>).</p>

<p>Form <b>principalis</b> Fruhstorfer.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in <i>galathea</i> Feld. (See figure in Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, pl. 553, figs. 1 <i>f, g</i>).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nicobar Islands</span>; not rere. There is no authenticated record of <i>galathea</i> occurring on the Andaman Islands.</p>

<p><b>130. Appias wardi</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga wardi</i>, Moore, 1884, p. 43 ({\male}{\female}, Nilgiris); Hampson, 1889, p. 362; Watason, 1894, p. 499; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 574; Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 398; Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 3, pl. 552, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>i</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appieas wardi</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1900, p. 256; Bingham, 1907, p. 214; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 157, t. 60 <i>f</i> ({\male}); Bell, 1913, p. 341 (early stages); Yates, 1931, p. 1007.</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina wardii</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74.</p>

<p><i>Appias neombo</i>, Moore (<i>non</i>Boisd), 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 131, pl. 1, fig. 3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white, with the general appearance of an <i>albina</i> (Boisd.) {\female}. Fore wing with base densely and broadly dusted with black, this scaling extending along the costa to the apical area; apical and marginal black area broad, its inner edge irregular, curving from costa to vein 4, outwards in area 2, and irregularly to inner margin; four subapical white spots in areas 3 to 6, with usually an additional linear anterior spot. Hind wing with slight basal black dusting; an outer narrow, marginal black border, wider from costa to vain 6, its inner edge strongly dentate.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; apical area butter-yellow; a post-discal, somewhat narrow, zigzag-curved, irregular black band from middle of costa to tornus. Hind wing butter-yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> somewhat similar to that of the {\male}, but differs in the much greater extent of the black area, which occupies the outer apical half of fore wing, and on the hind wing forms a broad marginal band; fore wing with two subapical spots; basal black scaling rather dense. Hind wing with the black border wider anteriorly as in the {\male}, and bordered proximally with more or less extensive black dusting, which extends posteriorly to the similar band of black dusting along the inner margin.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; basal half of cell suffused with sulphur-yellow; post-discal black band as in the {\male}, but much broader; apical area pearly bluish-white. Hind wing pearly bluish-white.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>arida</b>. nov.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> similar to the wet form. Fore wing with more restricted black basal scaling and apical black; apical area usually with a more or less diffuse appearance, the subapical spots very ill defined. Hind wing white, sometimes with a faint yellowish tinge.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, with a bluish tint broadly along the basal two-thirds of costal margin; apical area butter-yellow; post-discal black band usually absent or indicated by some black scales. Hind wing uniform butter-yellow. Figured by Moore (<i>q.v.</i>) as <i>neombo</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> similar to the wet form, but black areas much restricted, as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the post-discal black band very much narrower than in the wet form. Hind wing with a yellow tinge. Very similar to the <i>principalis</i> form of <i>albina darada</i>, and sometimes difficult to separate with certainty. The <i>albina darada</i>, and sometimes difficult to separate with certainty. The <i>albina</i> {\female} is usually without any black dusting over the inner or submarginal areas of hind wing, which is a feature of <i>paulina</i> and <i>wardi</i>.</p>

<p>In both sexes and in both seasonal forms the antenn{\ae} are black dotted with white, the tufted hair on the head and thorax anteriorly greyish-green, abdomen white; underside of head and thorax pale yellowish-white; abdomen white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-75 mm.</p>

<p>This insect appears to replace <i>paulina</i> in Southern India. It is so much modified, possessing the characteristics of both <i>paulina</i> and <i>leis</i>, that it seems best to treat it as a species.</p>

<p>The name <i>yaksha</i> Fruhst., which was supposed to represent a dry form of <i>wardi</i>, applies to small males of <i>libythea</i> (Fabr.), somewhat intermediate between wet- andy dry-season specimens. This is revealed by an examination of the type, now in the British Museum.</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Resembles that of <i>lyncida latifasciata</i> Moore, but is, as a rule, more thickly covered with black tubercles. Surface of body rugose, bearing six transverse rows, from above the spiracular region over the dorsum, of small, shiny, conical setiferous, black tubercles to each segment; segments 2, 12, and 13 with only a few transverse rows of such tubercles. Body light green, sometimes tinged with lilac, and with a yellowish-white, narrow, spiracular band from segments 2 and 3 and 12, where the band expands. Length, 30 mm.; breadth, 3.75 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Resembles that of <i>latifasciata</i>, with the head process long, flattened laterally, slightly curved, pointed at the extremity. Dirty white, with a pink shade on segments 4 to 14; snout, points on segment 2, extremity of cremaster, and sometimes the teeth of segments 5 to 7 are black; a dorsal black spot on hind margin of segment 2, a similar spot just behind the shoulder, a lateral one on segments 3 to 12, and a dorsal one on the front marginas of 9 and 10; always a semicircle of six dark dorsal spots on areas 6 and 7. The colour of the pupa when formed under a leaf is probably green, the markings more or less as above. Length, 21.25 mm., of which the snout is 2.75 mm.; breadth at shoulders, 5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;Eggs are laid on the tender leaves of capers, such as <i>Capparis heyneana</i> Wall., probably singly, though there are generally many larv{\ae} on each tree, indicating tha the eggs might be laid in clusters. The pupa is generally attached to the underside of a leaf, or to the trunk of a tree or branch. Pupal stage of short duration.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a strong and fast flier. It frequents the evergreen parts of the North Kanara district from sea-level up to 2,500 feet, and seemingly is confined to the hill jungles, where the rainfall is heavy. It is fond of sun, congregates at wet places, is not frequent at flowers, and flies very high.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>, <i>e.g.</i>, Kanara, the Nilgiri Hiills, Coorg, Travancore; rare, but according to Yates (1930) is fairly commono on the Ghats.</p>

<p>Type of <i>arida</i> in the British Museum, from the Nilgiri Hills, 3,500 feet, March 8th, 1886. {\female} allotype from Kanara; Kutgul, March (<i>ex</i> Coll. Davidson).</p>

<p><b>Appias leis</b> (H\dd{u}bner, 1832).</p>

<p>This species, if it be really distinct from <i>paulina</i> (Cram.), is as yet but imperfectly known. A variety of forms, some of which may be assigned to <i>paulina</i> and others to <i>leis</i>, are found in the Malayan-Papuan area. The Indian <i>adamsoni</i> (Moore) appears to belong to the <i>leis</i> group of forms, and its nearest ally is <i>distanti</i> (Moore), from the Malay Peninsula. It is strange that the <i>paulina</i> forms have a discontinuous distribution, and that in north New Guinea a form should exist which is very like <i>galathea</i> from the Nicobars. It is possible that <i>leis</i> and <i>paulina</i> are conspecific.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> resembles the {\female} of <i>albina</i> (Boisd.), or in some forms has the marginal black much reduced, with a dentate edge, and with or without a free spot in area 3 of the fore wing; basal black scaling narrow or absent. Hind wing with or without a marginal black border, which is strongly dentate.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing, in forms with reduced black on upperside, without a post-discal black band; usually this band is present, being narrow, and proceeding from a prominent spot in area 3 anteriorly to vein 6; apical area yellowish. Hind wing yellowish.</p>

<p>{\femlae}. Resembles <i>paulina</i> and <i>wardi</i>. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with black areas broader than in<i>paulina</i>, and the basal black scaling much denser, its edge straight; three sub-apical white spots in areas 4 to 6, and often a fourth anterior spot present. Hind wing with broad, black, marginal border, its inner edge irregular, straight or incurved, but not dentate; basal and inner areas more or less dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in <i>paulina</i>, but on the fore wing the black post-discal band is wider. Hind wing with or without a broad, dark, marginal border or submarginal band.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x204;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, south and east to the Pacific and Australia. One subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>131. Appias leis adamsoni</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga adamsoni</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 4, pl. 551, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b, c</i> ({\female}, wet-season form), 2 <i>d, e</i> ({\male}, extreme dry-season form); Adamson, 1908, p. 120 (Burma, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Appias melania adamsoni</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 155, t. 61 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Appias paulina adamsoni</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 74, pl. viii, fig. B 10.7, ({\male}, as <i>galathea</i> Feld.).</p>

<p><i>Appias leis</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> H\dd{u}bn.), 1907, p. 213.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> somewhat resembles the {\female} of <i>albina</i> (Boisd.). Fore wing with base and costa somewhat thickly dusted with black; apical area broadly black; outer marginal series of inwardly-pointed black triangular vein-spots, these spots confluent along the extreme margin; between veins 3 and 6 a short post-discal black line that ends posteriorly in a large black spot in area 3, this line confluent along the veins with the marginal black, the two thus enclosing a vertical series of three prominent white spots. Hind wing with a marginal series of black vein-spots, these spots elongate and prominent anteriorly, obsolescent and diffuse posteriroly.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; apical area above an oblique line that passes through base of vein 6, ochraceous; a diffuse, black, curved, subapical band from costa to outer margin, but is usually obsolete; a prominent large, quadrate, black, post-discal spot in area 3; basal area tinged with yellow, Hind wing ochraceous-yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with large basal area densely dusted with black, producing a dark grey appearance; costa and a little more than apical half of wing jet-black; the inner edge of this area irregular, formed very much as in <i>wardi</i>, and straight or slightly excurved from vein 2 to inner margin; an oblique subapical line of four white spots in pairs. Hind wing with the base and a broad band to the tornus thickly dusted with black; distal third black, its inner edge curved and diffuse; a slight yellowish-green tinge on inner margin and at base.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing resembles the upperside, but the cell, except at the lower angle, yellowish-green; apical area broadly pearly-white, tinged at apex with greenish. Hind wing pearly-blue, sometimes pink, the veins and outer margin narrowly and diffusely bordered by greenish-yellow; curved post-discal and submarginal purplish-black bands, ill defined and irregular. Antenn{\ae} black speckled with white; head and thorax in {\male} bluish-grey, in the {\female} with greyish-green long hairs; abdomen greyish-black; underside of thorax yellow; of abdomen, white.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>alcesta</b>, nov.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with black markings much restricted and often diffuse; the post-discal black band and the black spot in area 3 often only indicated by a few diffuse scales. Hind wing with marginal spots much less prominent or absent.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with only the black spot in area 3 present.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to wet-season {\male} specimens, the black areas less broad, and the post-discal short black band on fore wing often ablsent.</p>

<p>{\male} holotype from the Karen Hills, 2,000 feet, November 1920 (W. H. Evans) (British Museum).</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-75 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>. According to Evans (1932 <i>a</i>) not rare, but no series of specimens are seen in collections; {\female} rare.</p>

<p><b>Appias nero</b> (Fabricius, 1793).</p>

<p>An easily recognized species with its <i>upperside</i> deep crimson-lake to orange, the veins black.</p>

<p>A frequenter of wooded areas, and often congregating at wet places; flight rapid. The {\male} usually common, except in India; {\female} scarce.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and Hainan, extending to Java, the philippines, Celebes, and Buru.</p>

<p><b>132. Appias nero galba</b> (Wallace).</p>

<p><i>Tachyris galba</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 378 (N. India); Adamson, 1908, p. 120 (Chin Hills, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Catophaga galba</i>, Watson, 1894, p. 499.</p>

<p><i>Appias nero galba</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 150; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75, pl. viii, fig. B 10.8 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Appias nero</i>, Smith &amp; Kirby, 1894, <i>Appias</i>, pl. i, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}, Burma).</p>

<p><i>Appias nero galba</i> f. nebo, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 150.</p>

<p><i>Appias nero</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1907, p. 202, pl. xvi, fig. 108 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> vermilion to deep crimson-red, the veins more or less black; outer margin of both wings and apex of fore wing more or less dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing apical area and most of the hind wing rich chrome-yellow; fore wing with basal and discal areas margin of hind wing broadly yellow; veins concolorous. Antenn{\ae} black, dotted sparsely with white, club tipped with orange; head, thorax, and abdomen black with dark greyish-green hairs.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> coloration as in <i>male</i>. Fore wing with costa narrowly, apex and outer margin more broadly, black; a post-discal short oblique black band, terminating in area 4, where it is separated from he marginal black by a spot of the ground-colour; a submarginal black bar in area 2 also encloses between it and the marginal black a spot of the ground-colour. Hind wing with a marginal black border, crenulate on its inner edge.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the basal and discal areas vermilion-red, apex dusky ochraceous, with a pale, ill-defined, short bar that limits it on the inner side; indications of the post-discal black band and of the bar in area 2 as on upperside. Hind wing dull ochraceous, darkenning to ochraceous-red along outer margin; an irregular and diffuse discal purplish band.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 65-80 mm.</p>

<p>Specimens with light yellow upperside are <b>nebo</b> Gr.-Sm. &amp; Kirby. These may belong to the dry season.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; not common, and rare in Sikkim. Also extends to Siam and Tong-king.</p>

<p>Genus <b>SALETARA</b> Distant.</p>

<p><i>Saletara</i>, Distant, 1885 <i>a</i>, pp. 287, 316 (<i>nathalia</i> Feld.); Butler, 1898 <i>a</i>, p. 392; Bingham, 1907, p. 217; Fruhstorfer, 1910,) p. 181; Klots, 1932, p. 211.</p>

<p>Type of the genus, <i>S. panda nathalia</i> (Felder), from the Philippines.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with apex acute; costa nearly straight; outer margin straight, slightly excurved posteriorly to the rounded tornus; inner margin straight; cell long, more than half length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell basad; 7+8 and 9 rather short, on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>mdc</i> about two-thirds as long as <i>ldc</i>, angled, with a short spur projecting into the cell from the angle; <i>ldc</i> straight. Hind wing with precostal vein fairly long, tapering, sharply curved distad; <i>mdc</i> very oblique. Abdomen with a long dorsal hair-pencil arising from the eight tergite, besides the two ventral tufts as in <i>Appias</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. In Malayan, Papuan, and some Philippine forms vein 9 of the fore wing is absent.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, palpi, head, thorax, and abdomen as in <i>Appias</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;<i>Saletara</i> are found only in the plains and frequent wet places. The flight is swift and steady. Early stages unknown.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nicobar Islands</span> and Malay Peninsula, extending to the Pacific islands (absent in the Lesser Sunda Islands). Four species are known, of which one is found in the Nicobars.</p>

<p><b>Saletara panda</b> (Godart, 1819).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white to yellow. Fore wing with narrow costal and outer marginal black borders.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white or yellow. Fore wing with dark basal area and very broad costal and outer black borders. Hind wing with dark basal area and a black outer border of variable width, its inner edge dentate or even.</p>

<p>Two forms of both sexes are usually found, a white and a yellow one.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Nicobar Islands</span> and Malay Peninsula to Java, the Philippines, Celebes, and Sula Islands. The {\male} usually common, the {\female} scarce.</p>

<p><b>133. Saletara panda chrys{\ae}a</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Saletara panda chrys{\ae}a</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1930 <i>c</i>, p. 124 (Great Nicobar); id., 1904 <i>c</i>, p. 348; id., 1910, p. 182, t. 62 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Saletara chrys{\ae}a</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 15, pl. 558, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 217, pl. xvii, figs. 114, 115 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Appias panda chrys{\ae}a</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing pale sulphur-yellow, darker towards the tornus; basal area dusted with black; costa narrowly, outer margin more broadly, black, not extended to the tornus. Hind wing rich chrome-yellow, fading to sulphur-yellow along the inner margin; base slightly dusted with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> rich cadmium-yellow, basal third of costa of fore wing and upper part of inner margin of hind wing slightly paler. Antenn{\ae} black, speakled on the inner side with white; palpi and frons yellow, mixed with dusky black hairs; head above greenish, thorax with bluish-grey hairs, abdomen yellowish-white; underside of thorax yellowish, and of abdomen white; anal tufts dark brown.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> rich cadmium-yellow. Fore wing with basal area dusted with black to near apex of cell; costa, apex very broadly, and outer fourth of wing jet-blck. Hind wing with a broad basal area, extending to the tornus, dusted with black; costa pale sulphur-yellow; outer margin broadly bordered with black, its inner edge diffuse; inner margin broadly white; cilia anteriorly yellow, posteriorly black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with basal two-thirds dull yellow; costa suffused basally with dusky black; inner margin whitish; a post-discal evenly curved black band from vein 7 to tornus, edged in the apical part with white; distally of this band the costa, apical area, and outer margin rich yellow. Hind wing somewhat pearly-white with a pinkish tinge, edged with yellow along the costa and outer margin to tornus.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Nicobar Islands</span>; rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>PIERIS</b> Schrank.</p>

<p><i>Pieris</i>, Schrank, 1801, pp. 152, 161; Latreille, 1810, p. 440 (type, <i>brassic{\ae}</i> Linn.); Verity, 1907, p. 115 (part.); Bingham, 1907, p. 167 (part.); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 44; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 139; Klots, 1932, pp. 212, 213; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 63, 66; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 128 (type, <i>brassic{\ae}</i> Linn.); id., 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 33.</p>

<p><i>Danaus</i> Oken (<i>non</i> Kluk), 1815, p. 723; Crotch, 1872, p. 60 (type, <i>brassic{\ae}</i> Linn.); Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 124.</p>

<p><i>Ganoris</i>, Dalman, 1816, p. 61 (type, <i>brassic{\ae}</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Andropodum</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1822, pp. 2-5, 7-9; Hemming, 1933, p. 199 (type, <i>brassic{\ae}</i> Linn.); id., 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 129.</p>

<p><i>Tachyptera,</i> Berge, 1842, pp. 19, 92-105; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 129; id., 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 38 (type, <i>brassic{\ae}</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Synchloe</i>H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 26; Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 51 (type, <i>callidice</i> H\dd{u}bn.); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 50; Hemming, 1931, p. 273 (type, <i>callidice</i> H\dd{u}bn., 1799); id., 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 130.</p>

<p><i>Parapieris</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1887 <i>a</i>, p. 563 (type, <i>callidice</i> Esp.); Moore, 1905 <i>a</i>, p. 140; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 140.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>P. brassic{\ae}</i> (Linn.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa arched, apex obtuse; outer margin straight; tornus broadly rounded; inner margin straight or slightly sinuous, more than three-fourths the length of the costa; cell elongate, more than half length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9; <i>mdc</i> oblique, from a third to more than half as long as <i>ldc</i>. Hind wing subtriangular, the costa very long, both apex and tornus evenly rounded, outer margin short, gently arched; cell more than half the length of wing, pointed at lower angle; precostal vein fairly long, curved strongly distad; <i>mdc</i> shorter than <i>udc</i> and <i>ldc</i>; <i>ldc</i> more or less angled. Antenn{\ae} about half the length of fore wing, club small and gradual or large and spatulate; palpi slender, third segment short.</p>

<p>The genus <i>Synchloe</i> H\dd{u}bner is here merged with <i>Pieris</i>, to form a secondary group, whilst the genus <i>Pontia</i> Fabricius retains generic status.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;The whole North American and Pal{\ae}archtic region, <span class="smallcaps">India</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to the Malay Peninsula; absent from Ceylon and the Andaman Islands.</p>

<p><i>Key to Groups and Species.</i></p>

<p>A. Hind wing underside in Indian forms with a post-discal or submarginal series of spots. Antennal club large and spatulate. ..</p>

<p>[p. 414. <span class="smallcaps">Callidice</span> Group,</p>

<p>B. Hind wing underside in Indian forms without a post-discal or submarginal series of spots. Antennal club gradual, not large or spatulate</p>

<p>[p. 418. <span class="smallcaps">Brassic{\ae}</span> Group,</p>

<p><i>Callidice</i> Group.</p>

<p>a. Hind wing underside with markings green</p>

<p><i>callidice</i> H\dd{u}bn., [p. 415.</p>

<p>b. Hind wing underside with markings not green.</p>

<p><i>dubernardi</i> (Oberth.), [p. 416.</p>

<p><i>Brassic{\ae}</i> Group.</p>

<p>1. Fore wing uppeside with a triangular black subapical costal patch. ...</p>

<p>[p. 418. <i>Krueperi</i>, Stgr.,</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside without a triangular black subapical costal patch. ..</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing underside with the veins defined with black. ...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>Hind wing underside with the veins not defined with black.. ...</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>3. Large species, Fore wing with a prominent black spot in area 3, its inner and outer edges incurved; hind wing with a prominent black apical spot. ..</p>

<p>[p. 422. <i>extensa</i> Pouj.,</p>

<p>Smaller species. Fore wing with black spot in area 3 small, more or less rounded; hind wing with small apical black spot. ..</p>

<p><i>napi</i> (Linn.), p. 419.</p>

<p>4. Fore wing upperside with marginal black reaching to below vein 3. ..</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with marginal black not reaching to below vein 4. ..</p>

<p><i>rap{\ae}</i> (Linn.), p. 428.</p>

<p>5. Fore wing upperside with inner ecge of black area dentate. ...</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with inner edge of black area not dentate. ...</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>6. Hind wing upperside with a continuous marginal black band; in the {\female} only traversed by the white veins</p>

<p>[p. 424. <i>deota</i> (de Nic\'ev.),</p>

<p>Hind wing upperside without a marginal black band, only separated spots or specks. ... .</p>

<p>[p. 425. <i>canidia</i> (Sparrm.),</p>

<p>7. Hind wing underside dusted with black... .</p>

<p><i>brassic{\ae}</i> (Linn.). [p. 426.</p>

<p>Hind wing underside not dusted with black, uniform ochraceous-yellow.</p>

<p><i>naganum</i> (Moore), [p. 423</p>

<p><i>Callidice</i> Group (=<i>Synchloe</i> H\dd{u}bn., <i>Parapieris</i> de Nic\'ev.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Antennal club large and spatulate. Hind wing underside with green or yellow ground-colour, and in Indian forms with dark post-discal or submarginal spots, resembling some species of <i>Aporia</i>. Genitalia with the valve rounded in the apical part; {\ae}deagus with a prominent basal prong.</p>

<p>The species of this group are confined to high elevations. They have a rapid and irregular flight, and are very shy.</p>

<p>Only four species are placed in this group, of which two are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Pieris callidice</b> (H\dd{u}bner, 1799).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with a prominent disco-cellular spot; marginal black spots on the veins; a black post-discal stripe reaching vein 3, with a spot in area 1<i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings greenish. Hind wing with the pale spots sagittate.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with extended black markings. Hind wing with basal area darkened, outer margin broadly black, with white submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;The high mountains of Europe to Turkestan and West China, entering the Indian area on the North-West. Five subspecies, of which only one is found inthe Indian area.</p>

<p><b>134. Pieris callidice kalore</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Pieris kalora</i>, Moore, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 449, pl. xxxi, fig. 15 ({\male}, N.W. Himalayas).</p>

<p><i>Pieris callidice</i> var. kalora, Verity, 1908-1911, pp. 131, 326, pl. lxvi, figs. 9 ({\female}), 11 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parapieris callidice kalora</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 140.</p>

<p><i>Synchloe callidice kalora</i>, Talbot, 1932, p. 278.</p>

<p><i>Pieris callidice kalora</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 66, pl. vii, figs. B 4.2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parapieris callidice</i>, de Nic\'eville (<i>non</i> H\dd{u}bner), 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 563; Moore, 1904, p. 140, pl. 521, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>, 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Pieris callidice</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> H\dd{u}bner), 1907, p. 178.</p>

<p><i>Pieris callidice</i> var. <i>kalora</i> ab. <i>magnomaculata</i>, Verity, 1911, p. 326, pl. lxvi, fig. 10 (Hunza); Bollow, 1930, p. 101.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Forw wing with extreme base of areas 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i>, and cell black; a discocellular black quadrate spot; a post-discal curved series of inwardly dentate spots, the one in area 3 often absent, and those in 1 and 2 obsolete or absent; a marginal series of similar but more clearly defined spots on veins 3 to 7. Hind wing unmarked except for a basal dusting of black; the pattern of the underside visible through transparency.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white; basal half of costal margin and quadrate discocellular spot dull black; a post-discal curved series of four black spots in areas 1, 3, 5, and 6, followed by elongate green streaks along veins 3 to 7 that reach the outer margin. Hind wing green; an elongate, oval, yellowish-white cell-spot; a post-discal and marginal curved series of yellowish-white, inwardly lanceolate spots; a yellowish-white streak in area 7. Antenn{\ae} black, spotted with white; head fuscous-grey; thorax blackish-grey; abdomen black, with more or less sparse white scaling; underside of head, thorax, and abdomen white. </p>

%%%%% 446 
<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>
</body>
</html>
