<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
	<title>Butterflies</title>
	<link href="style.css" media="screen" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body bgcolor="#FFFFF1">
%%%% 301 page

<p><b>86 <i>b</i>. Parnassium hardwickei albicans</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> ab. <i>albicans</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1898, p. 147 (Sikkim: Lochung Valley and Donika Pass); Austaut, 1899, p. 154; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, pl. 3; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111; Verity, 1907, p. 90, pl. xix, figs. 19 ({\male}), 20 ({\female}) (types).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i>, Moore (part.), 1902, p. 111, pl. 408, figs. 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> ab. <i>after</i>,Fruhstorfer, 1899 <i>b</i>, p. 354; Moore, 1902, p. 112, pl. 409, figs. 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> ab. <i>parva</i>, Verity, 1907, p. 90, pl. xxi, figs. 19 ({\male}), 20 ({\female}); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111; Evans, 1914 <i>a, p</i>. 766.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei viridicans</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111, t. 50 <i>c</i> ({\male}), <i>d</i> ({\femlae}) (Sikkim); Evans, 1914 <i>a</i>, p. 766; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 59.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> f. <i>charino</i>, Verity (<i>non</i> Gray), 1907, pl. xxi, figs. 17 ({\male}), 18 ({\female}) (Sikkim).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. All bands and spots small with very little red on the fore wing; the submarginal lunules on fore wing all small and usually entirely free within the dark marginal border.</p>

<p>Hind wing with reduced blue spots, the anal ocellus without red, the anterior one with a red dot only. {\female} with red spots above, and below with blackish scaling in place of the red basal spots. Smaller than the nominotypical race. Represents the dry spring form occurring from April to June.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>afer</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;Wings much dusted with black, especially at the base and on disc of fore wing, as well as over the basal and inner areas of hind wing. Fore wing costal spots with red centres, and the submarginal spots all intensified and contiguous.</p>

<p>A second wet form is <b>viridicans</b> Fruhst., in which the underside is much more strongly green.</p>

<p>The name <b>parva</b> Verity refers to specimens intermediate between <i>albicans</i> and <i>afer</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>; common.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius stoliczkanus</b> Felder.</p>

<p><i>P. stoliczkanus</i> Feld. has often been associated with <i>delphius</i> Eversm., but is here considered as distinct, as was done by Felder, Elwes, Bang-haas, and Bollow (in Seitz's `Macro-lepidoptera'). Like <i>delphius</i> Eversm., it is split up into a number of forms which appear to represent races. The two species appear to occur together in Ladak, but whether upon the same ground is not certain.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Distinguished by the pattern of the hind wing. There is a row of five antemarginal ocelli or spots, and these are placed on the edge of the black marginal border, or are within this border; they are usually dark blue to black with a light blue centre. The discal ocellus has a red centre and lies nearer the marginal border than to the cell. The subcostal ocellus is often absent. {\female} pouch small, with the two lobes more truncate than in <i>delphius</i>.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span>, south and east to <span class="smallcaps">Kulu</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>. Seven subspecies or forms, as one may regard them, are to be distinguished.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>a</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus rileyi</b> Tytler. (Fig. 79, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius rileyi</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 251, pl. iv, figs. 6 ({\male}), 7 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus rileyi</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 32; Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus tytlerianus</i>, Bryk &amp; Eisner, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 40, {\male} (Yasin).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. ``Very near to <i>nicevillei</i> from the Burzil Pass, Gurais, which again is very clsoe to <i>P. atkinsoni</i> from the Pir Panjal and from Haramosh Mountain in Gilgit; it differs from the latter in the smaller marginal spots of the hind wing; these spots are about the same size in <i>rileyi</i> as in <i>nicevillei</i>, the former, however, differs from <i>P.atkinsoni</i> in not having the red spot in area 2 of the hind wing nearly so well developed. In both <i>P. nicevillei</i> and <i>P. atlinsoni</i> this spot is very large and bright; in some specimens of <i>P. rileyi</i> this spot is very small and inconspicuous, and in one it is completely absent and is replaced by a very large black spot'' (<i>Tytler</i>, l. c.).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Rupal Vallery; Astor; Farsat Pass</span>*, leading into Chilas. In July and August; not rare.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>b</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus nicevillei</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 80, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius nicevillei</i>, Avinoff, 1916, pp. 355, 356, pl. liii, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2 ({\female}) (Burzil Pass); Tytler, 1926, p. 251; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 60.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus nicevillei</i>, O, Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 33; Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. May be considered as a transition from <i>atkinsoni</i> Moore to <i>stoliczkanus</i> Feld., and is smaller than the former. Differs chiefly in the darker markings, especially in the discal area of fore wing, also the black bands appear narrower. Hind wing with the median ocellus large and pale red, some-times narrowly surrounded with black; it is much larger than the subcostal ocellus, which seldom has a red centre and which is sometimes quite absent. The blue ocelli are placed in a darker submarginal zone than in <i>atkinsoni</i>, the paler intermediate areas narrower or absent.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>* The Farsat Pass is a continuation of the range of mountains on the south side of the Rupal Valley.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span>: Burzil Pass. Described from about seventy specimens which were found to be rather constant.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>c</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus atkinsoni</b> (Moore). (Fig. 81, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Koramius atkinsoni</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 121, pl. 412, fig. 2 (Kashmir; Pir Panjal).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus</i> f. <i>atkinsoni</i>, Verity, 1907-11, p. 82, pl. x, fig. 13 ({\female}), pl. lxiv, figs. 13, 14 ({\female}), p. 317.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius atkinsoni</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 125; Avinoff, 1916, pp. 355, 356, pl. 53, fig. 4 ({\male}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 60; Tytler, 1926, p. 251 (E, Gilgit: Haramosh Mt.).</p>

<p><i>Tadumia delphius</i> var. <i>atkinsoni</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 55; O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 32.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with broader bands, all three complete. Hind wing with distinctly blue marginal band; two ocelli, red, ringed with black, the posterior one enlarged; two red-centred inner marginal spots.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>The {\male} is figured by Avinoff (1916). This figure, reproduced above, has the large post-discal spot on the right hind wing absent.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span>: Pir Panjal; <span class="smallcaps">East Gilgit</span>: Haramosh Mt.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>d</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus zogilaica</b> Tytler. (Fig. 82, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius zogilaica</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 251, pl. iv, fig. 5 ({\female}) (N. Kashmir: Zogila Pass).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus zogilaica</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927,. p. 33, t. 4, fig. 14 ({\female}); Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p>{\female}. ``Differs from the allied <i>nicevillei</i> and <i>rileyi</i> in being much paler on both wings, and the marginal spots are rather smaller and largely centred with blue; these spots do not touch one another and are placed on a white ground with no dusky scales between them'' (<i>Tytler</i>, l.c.).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">N. Kashmir</span>: Zogila Pass.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>e</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus stoliczkanus</b> C &amp; R. Felder. (Fig. 83 {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 138, t. 69, figs. 2, 3; Elwes, 1886, pp. 40-1, pl. iii, figs. 1, 2 (sphragis).</p>

<p><i>Koramius stoliczkanus</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 120, pl. 142, figs. 1, 1 <i>a, b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius stoliczkanus</i>, Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 33, t. 16 <i>c</i>; id., 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 41; Verity, 1907, p. 82, pl. x, figs. 11 ({\male}), 12 ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 123; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110; Avinoff, 1916, p. 355; Tytler, 1926, p. 250 ({\female}, Ladak); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 60.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus stoliczkanus</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, pp. 31, 32.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius</i> var. <i>stenosemus</i>, Honrath, 1890, p. 127; id., 1892, p. 431, t. 15, fig. 3 (Ladak); Bingham, 1907, p. 125.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus stenosemus</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 32.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius</i> var. <i>stoliczkanus</i> ab. <i>obliterata</i>, Verity, 1911, p. 317, pl. lix, fig. 1 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus zanskarica</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 152 ({\male}{\female}, South Kashmir; Nira, Zanskar Mts., 4,500 m., August).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the post-discal dark band very broad, as broad as the marginal dark band; submarginal white spots small, not continued below vein 2; discal band often incomplete posteriorly. Hind wing with the discal spot in area 5 variable; spot in 7 usually absent; a broad marginal band in which stand four or five submarginal dark spots, blue in the {\female}; the posterior ocellus usually present, but sometimes reduced to a dot; often a red dot on the inner margin.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 50-59 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.&#x2014;An individual or seasonal form is represented by <b>stenosemus</b> Honr. This is larger, with the markings less well defined; fore wing with complete bands, the discal one posteriorly sometimes separated into spots. Hind wing with narrow marginal band; two to four submarginal spots centred with blue, being preceded by a narrowly shaded band; anterior ocellus sometimes absent, or reduced to a black dot.</p>

<p>A form figured by Verity under the name of <b>obliterata</b> has no discal and no subcostal ocellus on the hind wing. The Specimen is without locality.</p>

<p>The form described as <b>zanskarica</b> O. Bang-Haas is said to have smaller ocelli, the submarginal ones being centred with blue.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kulu</span>; very rare.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>f</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus spitiensis</b> Bang-Haas. (Fig. 84, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus spitiensis</i>, O, Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 33, t. iv, figs. 17 ({\male}), 18 ({\female}) (Spiti); Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with wide marginal and submarginal bands, the subcostal band either absent or faintly indicated; spot on the inner margin often obsolete. Hind wing with very wide marginal band bearing five marginal ocelli, generally with blue centres. In fresh specimens the median ocellus and anal spot are iridescent red with faint black rings. In the {\male} the anal ocellus often reduced, and the subcostal ocellus either entirely absent or reduced to a faint spot.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Spiti</span>: Tum Tum Thang Mts., at 15,000 feet.</p>

<p><b>87 <i>g</i>. Parnassius stoliczkanus florenci{\ae}</b> Tytler. (Fig. 85, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius florenci{\ae}</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 251, pl. iv, fig. 9 ({\male}) (Garhwal).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus florenci{\ae}</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 33, t. iv, figs. 15 ({\male}), 16 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius kumaonensis</i>, Riley, 1926, p. 277, pl. ii, fig. 3 (N. Kumaon: Shillong, 12,500 feet).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> differs from the nominotypical form in the wings being whiter. Fore wing with not dusky scaling in areas 1, 2, and 3, except a very small and clear dark spot in area 1. Marginal area very dark and broad, bearing a row of small and clear white spots, not so disjointed in area 4 as in <i>s. stoliczkanus</i>. Hind wing with the marginal area completely dusky, bearing three complete dark spots with blue centres, and two small dark spots without blue scales; spots in areas 2, 3, and 4 are in line; a clear small red discal spot and a very small tornal spot.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span>: Phup, Hundes, north of Tehri; in June; very rare. Also in <span class="smallcaps">North Kumaon</span>.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius delphius</b> Eversmann.</p>

<p>This species has a wide distribution and is split up into many forms and a number of subspecies. The first-described form  came from the southern foothills of the Altai. The forms found in Sikkim and Bhutan are more nearly allied to the West Chinese ones, and are classed by some authorities with <i>acdestis</i> Gr.-Grsh. as a distinct species; the forms found in the North-West Himalayas are closer to the nominotypoical <i>delphius</i>.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Distinguished by the hind wing pattern. Two anal ocelli are present, but no antemarginal ones. There is a dark heavy submarginal line or band which is separated from a black marginal border, although sometimes only by a thin line; marginal border narrow. The discal ocellus is not placed near the submarginal line, but either mid-way between it and the cell or nearer the cell. The subcostal ocellus is usually present. The {\female} pouch forms a belt round the abdomen, and is prolonged below to a bifid lobe, and provided beneath with a deep longitudinal groove.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i> (<i>P. delphius illustris</i> Gr.-Grsh.).&#x2014;Unlike the larv{\ae} of other <i>Parnassius</i>, and more nearly resembles a <i>Papilio</i>. Ground-colour a dirty olive, Above, each segment with two small bands, the anterior band larger, of a velvety black bearing two light dots and innterrupted at the middle; the posterior band is olive-black, edged behind by a faint velvety black stripe which si scarcely visible on all the segments. A light stripe on each side, traversed at the middle of each segment by a small and faint darker line. On the underside of each segment are two velvety black dots. Length 36-40 mm. (From <i>Groum-Grshima\dd{i}lo</i>, quoted by Verity).</p>

<p>The larv{\ae} were found full-red under stones.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Turkestan and Pamirs to South-West China and Amdo. In the Indian area in the <span class="smallcaps">North-West Himalayas</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Karakoram</span>, south to <span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span> and Rupshu, reappearing in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>. The Indian forms may be divided into twelve subspecies, but some of these may turn out to be only individual or seasonal forms when more material becomes available for study.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>a</i>. Parnassius delphius kafir</b> Avinoff. (Figs. 86, {\male}, 86 <i>a</i>, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius kafir</i>, Avinoff, 1916, p. 357, pl. 53, figs. 8 ({\male}), 9 ({\female}) (Kila-Drosh: Kafiristan); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 59; Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p><i>Tadumia delphius</i> var. <i>kafir</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 59.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Close to <i>chitralica</i> Verity, but the fore wing has the discal band obsolete, and in the {\male} the post-discal dark band does not reach the inner margin. Hind wing narrow, with a sharp angle at vein 2; the discal spots in areas 5 and 7 prominently red and of equal size; spots in 1 <i>b</i> and 2 obsolete; blue-centred submarginal spots in 2 and 3. The brownish submarginal band bears a few pale spots. In the {\male} there is a deep black anal spot and dark median ocelli. In the {\female} the anal spots are faintly indicated by a few scales, and the median ocelli show pale blood-red centres. The subcostal ocelli are black in both sexes.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;Safed Koh (Afghanishtan) to <span class="smallcaps">Kafiristan</span>; very rare.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>b</i>. Parnassius delphius chitralica</b> Verity. (Fig. 87, {\female}; a, b, anal pouch).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius</i> var. <i>hunza</i> race <i>chitralica</i>, Verity, 1911, p. 317, pl. lxiv, figs. 11 ({\female}), 12 ({\female}) (Baroghil Valley, 3,600 m.).</p>

<p><i>Tadumia delphius</i> f. <i>chitralica</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 56.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius chitralica</i>, Bollow, 1929, p. 79; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 60.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius chitralensis</i>, Avinoff, 1916, p. 357.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius chitralica</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 250 (W. Gilgit; Yasin; Hunza: Misgar).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius hunza</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Gr.-Grsh.), 1907, p. 124, fig. 32.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Allied to <i>hunza</i> Gr.-Grsh., from which it differs in its generally smaller size and darker appearance. Fore wing with black markings more copious, the bands wider and diffuse; the post-discal and discal bands are conjoined in area 3. Hind wing with submarginal band heavier than in <i>hunza</i>, and distinctly separated from the hyaline margin by a band of the ground-colour; the discal red spot in area 5 prominent, the spot in 7 smaller, black or red, in 2 and 3 only blue spots.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 68-72 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span>; rare.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>c</i>. Parnassius delphius hunza</b> Groum-Grshima\dd{i}lo. (Fig. 88, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius stoliczkanus</i> var. <i>hunza</i>. Groun-Grshimailo, 1888, p. 303 (Kanjut).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius</i> var. <i>hunza</i>, Groun-Grshima\dd{i}lo, 1890, p. 205. pl. 10, fig. 1 <i>a, b</i>; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 33, t. 16 <i>b</i> ({\female}); Verity, 1907-10, pp. 83, 317, pl. x, figs. 9 ({\male}), 10 ({\female}), pl. lxiv, figs. 9 ({\male}, type), 10 ({\female}, type); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110.</p>

<p><i>Koramius hunza</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 123.</p>

<p><i>Tadumia delphius</i> var. <i>hunza</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 57.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A pale form with reduced markings, having a washed-out appearance. Fore wing without discal band, the short costal band not prolonged; sometimes increased grey discal scaling; no spot in area 1 <i>b</i>. Hind wing with very narrow grey margin, but a strong submarginal band which terminates in two black spots; ocelli all black, reduced or punctiform; no discal spot in 7, spot in 1 <i>b</i> small and black; discal ocellus placed about mid-way between the submarginal band and the cell.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>This form is rather more distinct than other <i>delphius</i> races. It shows, perhaps, the beginning of the <i>stoliczkanus</i> hind wing whilst still retaining the <i>delphius</i> type of pattern.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Eastern Hindu Kush</span>: Hunza district, the mountains of Kunjut, above 5,000 feet; taken in July; very rare.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>d</i>. Parnassius delphius afflnis</b> Peschke &amp; Eisner.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius affinis</i>, Peschke &amp; Eisner, 1934, p. 40, fig. (Gilgit).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Connects <i>chitralica</i> Vty. and <i>mamaievi</i> O. Bang-Haas, and it larger than either. Fringes black as in <i>chitralica</i>, with the wing strongly scaled  as in this race. All markings large and well defined, the wings glossy as in <i>Mamaievi</i>; the ocelli average smaller than in this race, andthe anterior ones tend to be less brightly coloured.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 30-33 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Gilgit</span>: Doubounni Mts. 13,500 feet, in July.</p>

<p>The description given of this form in not very satisfying it is provisionally placed here as a race.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>e</i>. Parnassius delphius workmani</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 89, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius</i> var. <i>workmani</i>, Avinoff, 1916 p. 357, pl. liii, fig. 7 ({\female}) (Baltistan); O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 31; Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius workmanni</i> (sic), O. Bang-Haas, 1935, pp. 111-12 ({\male}{\female}, Baltistan: Haldi, Pharo River, Saltoro Mts., and Saltoro River, July).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Wings covered with dark scales along the veins. The submarginal bands resemble those of <i>mamaievi</i> O. Bang-Haas, but are very reduced and dissolved into single dark spots. Discal area of fore wing similar to <i>hunza</i> Gr.-Grsh. The subcostal ocellus is black. This form is larger and paler than mamaievi.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 55 mm.; {\female}, 56-58 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baltistan</span>: Saltoro Glacier; described from a single {\female}, but recently both sexes were taken by O. Bang-Haas's collectors.</p>

<p><b>88. <i>f</i>. Parnassius delphius shigarensis Bang-Haas.-</b></p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius shigarensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1935, p. 111 ({\male}{\female}, Baltistan: Baltora Mts., north-east of the Ortes Shigar, 5,000 m., July).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour chalky white, all markings  deep black, the marginal and submarginal bands broad. Hind wing with very distinct submarginal band.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baltistan</span>: Baltora Mts., 15,000 feet.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>g</i>. Parnassius delphius cardinalina</b> Avinoff.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius nicevillei</i> ab. <i>cardinalina</i>, Avinoff, 1916, pp. 355, 356, pl. liii, fig. 3 ({\male}) (Burzil Pass); Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p>{\male}. Larger than <i>nicevillei</i> Avin., but with the <i>delphius</i> Pattern of hind wing. Fore wing with broad discal and submarginal bands somewhat as in <i>atkinsoni</i> Moore. Hind wing with the three red ocelli well developed, surrounded by heavy black rings and joined by black bars.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span>: Burzil Pass; very rare, only one specimen known.</p>

<p>This insect appears to represent <i>P. delphius</i> Eversm. rather than <i>P. stoliczkanus</i> Feld. It is said by Avinoff to be very close to <i>cardinal</i> Gr.-Grsh., and to be distinguished from it only by the character of the dark margin of the hind wing and by the absence of white scales in the red ocelli on the underside.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>h</i>. Parnassius delphius ladakensis</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 90, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acdestis ladakensis</i>, Avinoff, 1916, p. 354, pl. lii, fig. 7 {\female} (Shera-la); Bollow, 1929, p. 80. </p>

<p><i>Tadumia acdestis</i> var. M<i>ladakensis</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 48.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. A large and very pale race. wings more truncate than in <i>rupshuana</i> Avin., the marginal spots of hind wing larger, the other black markings very reduced. Fore wing with middle cell-spot little larger than the fain spot on inner margin.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span>: Shera-la.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>i</i>. Parnassius delphius mamaievi</b> O. Bang-Haas. (Fig. 91, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius stenosemus</i> f. <i>mamaievi</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1915, pp. 98, 166, t. 5, fig. 17 ({\male}) (S. Ladak).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius mamaievi</i>, Avinoff, 1916 p. 357, pl. liii, figs. 5 ({\male}), 6 ({\female}) (West Ladak); O. Bang-Haas 1927, pp. 31, 105, t. 5, fig. 12; Bollow, 1929, p. 79.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour white. Submarginal band of both wings very heavy and widely separated from the hyaline margin by a band of ground-colour. Fore wing with spot on inner margin rectangular or oblong. Ocelli mostly filled with red or yellow, sometimes, however, quite black; two  distinct anal ocelli with blue centres.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South</span> and <span class="smallcaps">West Ladak</span>.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>f</i>. Parnassius delphius rupshuana</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 92, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acdestis rupshuana</i>, Avinoff, 1916, p. 354, pl. lii, figs. 5 ({\male}), 6 ({\female}), p. 355 (sphragis) (South-West Ladak: Taga-lang-la); O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 34.</p>

<p><i>Tadumia acdestis</i> var. <i>rupshuana</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 49.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Larger than <i>lampidius</i> Fruhst., with more reduced submarginal band on hind wing. The hind wing marginal spots almost absent, only the second one faintly retained. Fore wing markings weak in the distal area.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South-West Ladak</span>: Rupshu. Taken at 17,500 feet flying over loose stony areas at the top of the Tagalong-la Pass; the butterfly almost touched the ground, and its flight resembled that of a bat.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>k</i>. Parnassius delphius lampidius</b> Fruhstorfer. (Fig. 93, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius lampidius</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>b</i> (a), p. 44, t. 1, fig. 2 (<i>non</i> 1); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 34; Verity, 1907, p. 80, pl. xix, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2 ({\female}); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110, t. 50 <i>e</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 60.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acdestis lampidius</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 35.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius whitei</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 125-6, fig. 33 ({\male}) (Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acdestis whitei</i>, Bollow, 1929, p. 80, t. 5 <i>f</i>; O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 34, t. 4, figs. 12 ({\female}), 13 ({\male} ab.).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius macdonaldi</i>, Rothschild, 1918, p. 256 (Tibet: Yatung).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acdestis</i> var. <i>pundit</i>, Avinoff, 1922, pp. 55, 57, 62, 196, pl. dxlvii, fig, 4626 ({\female}), pl. dxlvii, fig. 4627 ({\female}) (Bhutan).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius</i> f. <i>centripuncta</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 34, t. 4, fig. 13 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour pure white. Fore wing with cell-spot and marginal band narrowed, also the discal band narrower, being obtusely angulate behind the cell. Hind wing black from base to the ocelli, and to near anal angle; ocelli with heavy black borders and with distinct red centres; at anal angle two blackish dots, a narrow grey submarginal band. Hind wing below with a pale red spot at base of area 7. {\female} with lighter vitreous bands on fore  wing and with larger, light, carmine ocelli on hind wing.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>; very rare. Also in Bhutan and Tibet.</p>

<p>It seems probable that the names <i>whitei</i> Bingh., <i>macdonaldi</i> Roths., <i>pundit</i> Avin., and <i>centripuncta</i> O. B.-H. cannot be sustained.</p>

<p><b>88 <i>l.</i> Parnassius delphius lathoniuns</b> Bryk. (Fig. 94, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius lathonius</i>, Bryk, 1913 <i>a</i>, pp. 123, 124 (Gyantse); id., 1914, t. 29, fig. 139 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius latonius</i> (sic), Avinoff, 1916, p. 354, pl. 52, fig. 8 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Tadumia delphius lathonius</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius delphius latonius</i> (sic), Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 60.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acdestis lathonius</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 34, t. 4, fig. 19 ({\female}); Bollow, 1929, p. 80.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Antenn{\ae} achreous-brown at the base, otherwise black. Wings much larger than in <i>lampidius</i> Fruhst. and very dark. Fore wing above almost completely black-scaled; middle cell-spot ablong and not extending to the lower edge of the cell; the first subcostal spot in the distinct subcostal band occurs with reddish scales. Hind wing black-scaled to outer edge of discal spots, which are small and equal; ocelli red without pupils, and widely black-ringed, the second red basal spot shows through from below; both marginal ocelli are without blue centres; the margin faintly hyaline to vein 3.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the outer margin and the fringer of both wings with white scales. Fore wing without markings except for the cell-spot, which is faint; the vein-endings up to the glassy submarginal band are faintly powdered whitish; red ocelli as on upperside.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 55-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to the Phari Jong; very rare.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius imperator</b> Oberth\dd{u}r.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A large species. Fore wing broad and strongly dusted wing grey, more or less denser behind the cell, forming a prolongation of the short costal band. Submarginal band more strongly marked than the marginal band, and separated fromit by a series of white lunate spots. Hind wing with large ocelli which are usally mostly white; two large anal spots, shaded with blue; a shadowy posterior discal band. The {\female} is much darker than the {\male}.</p>

<p>{\female} pouch similar to that of <i>delphius</i> Eversm., only more robust, darker, below sledge-shaped, and posteriorly produced into two pointed lobes.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;``Deep slate colour, covered with short grey hair; alon each side are ten orange spots ringed with black. When touched it curls up in a ring'' (<i>Verity</i>, 1907).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Nan Chan to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> and South-East China. Only one subspecies enters the Indian area. The {\male} is usually very rare.</p>

<p><b>89. Parnassius imperator augustus</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius imperator augustus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>c</i>, p. 113 (Sikkim border); Verity, 1907-11, p. 87, pl. xix, fig. 15 ({\male}); Bingham, 1907, pp. 118, 127, pl. 15, fig. 102 ({\female}); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111, t. 50 <i>b</i> ({\male}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 61.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Differs in the yellowish, sometimes even canary-yellow ground-colour and the more sharply defined and narrower black bands of both wings, the very large red, transparent basal patch, and the red tear-shaped spots (resembling those of <i>P. jacquemontii</i> Boisd., <i>epaphus</i> Oberth., and <i>hardwickei</i> Gray, but even larger) in the cell and the subanal area of the hind wing. The red ocelli of the hind wing remain smaller, but are more broadly margined with black, and, as well as the blue anal ocelli, have more white in the centre. Although <i>i. augustus</i> is not so large as <i>i. imperator</i>, the submarginal band of the fore wing is almost twice as broad; moreover, all the yellowish bands on the fore wing have a tendency in increase in width.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>; very rare, especially the {\male}. Taken originally at Khambajong, 40 miles north of the Sikkim border, at about 15,000 feet.</p>

<p><b>90. Parnassius maharaja</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 95, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius maharaja</i>, Avinoff, 1916, p. 353, pl. liv, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2 ({\female}); id., 1920, p. 80.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius cephalus maharaja</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 50; Bollow, 1929, p.77.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco maharaja</i>, Hering, 1932, Mitt. Zool. Mus. Berl. xvii, pp. 295, 303; O. Bang-Haas, 1933 <i>b</i>, pp. 90-1.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with a fuscous marginal band and a submarginal row of small dark lunules; discal band broadly but faintly marked from costa to vein 4, and by an indistinct grey patch near the inner margin; black discocelluar bar and bar in the cell well developed. Hind wing with a narrow dark marginal border and indistinct submarginal dots; in place of ocelli there is a small dark spot in area 5 and a larger rounded spot in 7; between the subcostal spot and the basal black there is a black dot placed at the edge of the cell in area 7. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing and of apex of fore wing with a reddish tinge; veins not scaled with white. Fringes black.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. Dark markings more developed, especially on hind wing, which bears a complete submarginal row of lunules, those in areas 2 and 3 being larger and more triangular. Discal ocelli larger than in the {\male}, though diffuse, with some pale reddish scales in the anterior one.</p>

<p>The size of this species is that of large <i>delphius</i> forms. The {\female} pouch indicates, according to Avinoff, a close affinity with <i>cephalus</i> Gr.-Grsh. and <i>szechenyi</i> Friv., but as veins 10 and 11 of the fore wing anastomose, the affinity is, perhaps, with <i>simo</i> Gray. According to Hering (1932) the insect belongs to <i>acco</i> Gray.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Rupshu</span>: Tagalang-la Pass, 18,000 feet. Taken on desole stony slopes near the crest of the Pass. Avinoff mentions having seen a specimen on the Depsang Plateau, 17,000 feet, in the Karakoram regin. The species also occurs in the vicinity of Sugetdavan in Chinese Turkestan. There are 2 {\male}{\male} in the British Museum from the Tagalang-la Pass, 15th to 30th July. Teh butterfly was rediscovered in 1931 and 1932 by O. Bang-Haas's collectors, who found it flying over rocky slopes near a glacier.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius simo</b> Gray.</p>

<p>This species, together with <i>Maharaja</i> Avinoff and <i>acco</i> Gray, form a group in which the first and second subcostals of the fore wing are partly or entirely anastomosed.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A small species with rather pointed wings. Fringe of fore wing black, of hind wing white. Hind wing with an indistinct red basal spot; antemarginal band formed of a series of small black dots separated from one another; ocelli generally washed with pale red or yellow; inner margin widely bordered with black. {\female} pouch resembles that of <i>acco</i> Gray, but is narrower and more tubular.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014; Central Asia (Issyk-kul) to the <span class="smallcaps">Hindu Kush</span>, Amdo, and <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>. In the Indian are ten subspecies may be distinguished provisionally, but more material is required for their study.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>a</i>. Parnassius simo simo</b> Gray. (Fig. 96. {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo</i>, Gray, 1852, p. 76, pl. 12, figs. 3 ({\male}), 4 ({\female}); Moore, 1902, p. 117, pl. 411, fig. 2; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 34; Verity, 1907-11, pp. 74, 315, pl. x, figs. 6 ({\male}), 7 ({\female}), pl. xvii, fig. 22 ({\female} ?), pl. lxiv, fig. 6 ({\male}); Bingham, 1907, p. 129; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110; Avinoff, 1916, p. 353; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 61.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dull white, the veins black. Fore wing at base and along costal margin lightly irrorated with black scales; a black medial transverse bar with even parallel sides across the cell, and a broader black bar on the discocellulars, this latter with a more or less outwardly curved outer edge; beyond this a bisinuate discal and an outwardly curved post-discal black band, both extended from the costa to vein 1; the discal band generally more or less obsolescent and ill defined below veins 3 or 4, but well marked between veins 1 and 2; outer edge of post-discal band with a tendency to be very narrowly continued outwards along the veins; outer margin dusky subhyaline black, bounded by an ancillary jet-black slender line; cilia dusky black. Hind wing with base and inner margin broadly and heavily shaded with black, sparsely covered with long recumbent white hairs that become fuscous along the extreme edge of the inner margin; the black occupies the basal half of cell and extends along the lower margin of its outer half to base of vein 4, from whence it narrows and is carried obliquely down to near the tornal angle; beyond the cell are two black-ringed red spots, one in area 5 and one in 7; a post discal, generally complete, curved series of black lunular marks and a narrow marginal dusky black band, bounded by an ancillary jet-black line as on the fore wing; cilia yellowish-white.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the usual glassy appearance, the markings of the upperside showing through; the following, however, are marked more or less by actual scaling; the medial and apical black cell-bars on fore wing; the red black-ringed spots on hind wing, with three additional basal red spots outwardly edged with black, the posterior two large and some-what pear-shaped. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; head above fuscous; beneath, the palpi, thorax, and abdomen with dusky fuscous pubescence, mixed on thorax and abdomen with long white hair.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 45-55 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Tibet</span>; very rare. Originally thought to have come from Ladak, but this was an error.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>b</i>. Parnassius simo avinoffi</b> Verity. (Fig. 97, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo avinoffi</i>, Verity, 1911, p. 319; O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 26, t. 5, fig. 9 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}. Characterized by the somewhat pointed lancet-like wings and yellowish-toned ground-colour. Fore wing with discal band faintly developed. Hind wing markings very variable; specimens occur with well-developed sagittate submarginal marks, and others without any submarginal marks, but these can be distinguished by the fore wing markings.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Hindu Kush</span>: Beik Pass, 18,000 feet. The Beik or Beyik Pass lies in 75&#176; 10' E. and  37&#176; 20' N. on the eastern outliers of the Hindu Kush.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>c</i> Parnassius simo lorimeri</b> Tytler. (Fig. 98, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo lorimeri</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 252, pl. iv, fig. 10 ({\male}) (Gilgit.)</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. ``Very like <i>P. boedromus</i> f. <i>hohlbecki</i> Avinoff, from the Alexandra Mts., Central Asia. The sexes are exactly alike and differ from the form of <i>P. boedromus</i> above mentioned in being somewhat paler, the dark spots in cell of fore wing not so well developed, and in the greater development of the black spot in area 5 of the hind wing, which is as well developed as the spot in area 7'' (<i>Tytler</i>, l. c).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Gilgit</span>: Kine-Chish Pass, about 14,000 feet.</p>

<p>Described from a {\male} and {\female}, the only ones seen, flying at the extreme summit of the Pass, which leads into tribal territory.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>d</i>. Parnassius simo colosseus</b> Bang-Haas.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo colosseus</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1935, p. 112 ({\male}{\female}, Baltistan: Saltoro Mts., 4,500 m., July; Baltora Mts., 5000 m., July).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Larger than other forms of <i>simo</i>. Fore wing with marginal and submarginal bands broad; subcostal band usually clearly defined. Hind wing with very weak marginal band; five or six isolated submarginal wedge-shaped marks.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baltistan</span>: Saltoro and Baltora Mts., from 13,500 to 15,000 feet.</p>

<p>91 <i>e</i> <b>Parnassius simo saserensis</b> Bang-Haas.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo saserensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1937, p. 342 ({\male}, North Kashmir: Saser Pass, 5,000 m., July).</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with subcostal band feebly developed, the marginal band reduced. Hind wing purer white, with weak marginal dusting; median ocellus darkened.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North Kashmir</span>: Saser Pass, 15,000 feet. Described from 2 {\male}{\male} taken in July.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>f</i>. Parnassius simo zarraensis</b> Bang-Haas.</p>

<p><i>Parnassisu simo zarraensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas,  1934 <i>b</i>, p. 152 ({\male}{\female}, South-East Kashmir: Tagalang-la Pass, Zarra, 5,000 m., July).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour yellowish, the markings indistinct; marginal bands reduced, forming occasionally white spots between the veins.</p>

<p>{\female} with broad wings; abdomen slightly hariy.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South-East Kashmir</span>: Tagalang-la Pass, 15,000 feet.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>g</i>. Parnassius simo simonides</b> Austaut.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simonides</i>, Austaut, 1912, p. 360, fig. 4; id., 1. c., p. 366, fig. 4 (N. Ladak).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Smaller than the nominotypical form, the expanse being only 36 mm. Markings much more greyish instead of black. Fore wing with wider marginal band, the submarginal band more curved, no band connecting the costal and inner marginal spots. Ocelli larger, pale red, with a thin black ring. Hind wing with reduced inner black area, the two anal spots showing on the white ground-colour; submarginal band of separate spots.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;? <span class="smallcaps">North Ladak</span>. Described from a single pair. There is a doubt as to whether this form really came from Ladak.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>h</i>. Parnassius simo simoides</b> O. Bang-Haas.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo simoides</i> O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 104 ({\male}{\female}) (Ladak: Zanskar); Bollow, 1929, p. 81.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with wide marginal and submarginal bands; in the {\female} the wide costal band reaches inner margin, but in the {\male} it is not complete, and the costal and inner marginal spots are not united. Hind wing with submarginal band distinctly dentate. Ground-colour white with a tinge of yellowish.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span>: Zanskar, south-west of Leh, 14,400 feet.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>i</i>. Parnassius simo peteri</b> O. Bang-Haas. (Fig. 99, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo peteri</i>, O. Bang-Haas. (Fig. 99, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo peteri</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 27, t. 4, figs. 10 ({\male}), 11 ({\female}) (Bashahr: Shipki Pass); Bollow, 1929, p. 81.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with chalky-white ground-colour, the costal band not fully developed, only distinct to vein 2, thence scarcely perceptible to the faint spot on inner margin. Submarginal band finely dentate.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bashahr</span>: Shipki Pass.</p>

<p><b>91 <i>j</i>. Parnassius simo acconus</b> Fruhstorfer. (Fig. 100, imago).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acconus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>d</i>, p. 148 (Kambajong, <i>non</i> Sikkim); id., 1903 <i>b</i>, pp. 43, 45, t. 1, fig. 1 (<i>non</i> fig. 2); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 34; Verity, 1907-11, pp. 75, 76, pl. xvii, fig. 33 ({\male}); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110, t. 50 <i>e</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius simo acconus</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 61.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius moellieri</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 129, 130, fig. 34 (Sikkim).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The wings very opaque, with a matt surface, and yellowish-white ground-colour upon which the black markings stand out prominently. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with post-discal dusky black band broader and placed nearer the margin than in <i>s. simo</i> Gray; between this band and the black marginal edging is a submarginal band of the ground-colour, divided by the veins into a prominent series of spots. Hind wing with no black marginal edging, the white scaling extended to the edge, which is bounded by the slender ancillary black line.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, at elevations of 16,000 feet and over.</p>

<p><b>92. Parnassius hannyngtoni</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 101, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hunnyngtoni</i> (sic), Avinoff, 1916, pp. 351-2, pl. 52, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2, 3 ({\male}) (Chumbi Valley); id., 1920, p. 80.</p>

<p><i>Tadumia acco hannyngtoni</i>. Bryk, 1922, p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco hunnyngtoni</i> (sic), O, Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 23, t. 4, fig. 7 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco hannyngtoni</i>, Bollow, 1929, p. 81, t. 5 <i>e</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hannyngtoni</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 61.</p>

<p>I take the liberty of spelling this name with an ``a'' instead of with a ``u'' as in the original, since the ``u'' is obviously an error; the species was dedicated to Hannyngton. Bryk and Evans have both considered it necessary to make the correction.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A small species with feeble markings. <i>Upperside</i> very white, without red spots. Fore wing with discal band more or less complete; post-discal dark band, submarginal white spots, and marginal dark band all of equal width. Hind wing with the spots in area 5, middle of 7, and base of 7 small and black; discal band more or less continuous from vein 7 to inner margin; basal black scaling very reduced, submarginal spots small, well separated; margin white. Antenn{\ae} yellowish-grey, gradually darkening at the extremity. The {\female} pouch resembles that of <i>P. acco</i> Gray, but is shorter and does not reach so far found the upper part of body.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 40-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">South Tibet</span>, 15,000-17,000 feet; very rare.</p>

<p>The shape of the {\female} pouch, as well as the characteristic white-scaled veins of the slightly pinkish surface of the hind wing below, place this species in the <i>acco</i> group.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco</i> Gray.</p>

<p>A small species allied to <i>simo</i> Gray, and restricted to the Himalayas.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fringe of both wings yellowish-white or russet, the edge of the wing sometimes russet. Fore wing usually with three complete band distally of the cell, the proximal one sometimes shortened or narrowed. Hind wing with red basal spots; ocelli small, with reddish or white centres; an ante-marginal row of black semi-lunate spots; marginal band with a black interrupted dusting. {\female} with more strongly developed red spots. Pouch baggy, encircling the abdomen, grooved below, and ending in two points.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, found from 17,000 to 19,000 feet; rather rare. At least two subspecies can be separated, and three others are here retained provisionally.</p>

<p><b>93 <i>a</i>. Parnassius acco acco</b> Gray. (Fig. 102, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco</i>, Gray, 1852, p. 76, pl. xii, figs. 5, 6; Moore, 1902, p. 116 (Part.), pl.  411, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 34, t. 16 <i>c</i>; Bingham, 1907, pp. 128-9; Verity, 1907-11, pp. 91, 318, pl. xix, figs. 22 ({\male}), 23 ({\female}), pl. lxiv, fig. 15 ({\female}) 16 ({\female}), pl. 3, fig. 20 (scales), pl. x, fig. 14 (sphragis); Bollow, 1929, p. 80.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco acco</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1908, <i>b</i> p. 110; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 61.</p>

<p><i>Tadumia acco</i>, Bryk, 1922, p. 46.</p>

<p>The type of this species is a {\female} (described as a {\female}) and is figured by Verity, 1911, pl. lxiv, fig. 16.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dull greyish-white. Fore wing at the costa and base with some black irroration, the white scaling clearest and most dense in the cell; a jet-black bar across middle of cell and one across the discocellulars; a dusky black discal band, rather broad from costa to vein 5, below which it is very narrow and usually reaches only to vein 3, and but faintly connected to the black spot on inner margin; this band usually bears an anterior crimson spot; broader and more strongly marked complete post-discal, band, separated from an equally wide dark marginal border by a complete row of small spots of the ground-colour. Hind wing with basal and inner area dusky black; a prominent red spot in area 5, a smaller one in the middle of 7, and a much smaller one in the base of 7; the spot in 5 is joined to the dark inner area by a dusky band; usually a small black spot at base of area 6; submarginal spots prominent, cuneiform, well separated; outer margin narrowly black, interrupted at the veins. </p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 40-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Tibet</span> and, perhaps, <span class="smallcaps">East Ladak</span>. The types were at first thought to be from Ladak, but this was an error. The species is very rare.</p>

<p><b>93 <i>b</i>. Parnassius acco tagalangi</b> O. Bang-Haas. (Fig. 103, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco tagalangi</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 23, t. iv, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2 ({\female}) (Ladak); Bollow, 1929, p. 81.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Intermediate between <i>a. acco</i> Gray and <i>hampsoni</i> Avinoff, but is smaller and paler than the former. Fore wing with all three bands well developed and heavier than in <i>hampsoni</i>, similarly with the submarginal spots of the hind wing.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Ladak</span>: Tagalang-la Pass, 15,000 feet.</p>

<p>Whether this name can be sustained depends on a study of more material.</p>

<p><b>93 <i>c</i>. Parnassius acco hampsoni</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 104, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco hampsoni</i>, Avinoff, 1916, pp. 352-3, pl. lii, fig. 4 ({\male}) (Karakoram).</p>

<p>{\male}. Smaller than the nominotypical from and with less heavy markings. Hind wing with reduced submarginal lunules and the ocelli very pale pinkish.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Karakoram</span>.</p>

<p><b>93 <i>d</i>. Parnassius acco baltorana</b> Bang-Haas.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco baltorana</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1937, p. 302 ({\male}, Baltistan: Baltora Mts., Shigar, August).</p>

<p>{\male}. Ground-colour pure white. Fore wing without a sub-costal band and no inner marginal spot. Hind wing with smaller ocelli and reduced submarginal band.</p>

<p>Apparenetly close to <i>hampsoni</i> Avin., of which it may be a form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baltistan</span>: Baltora Mts., Shigar. Described from 1 {\male}.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><b>93 <i>e</i>. Parnassius acco pundjabensis</b> O. Bang-Haas. (Fig. 105, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco pundjabensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 23, t. iv, figs. 3 ({\male}), 4 ({\female}) (Spiti); Bollow, 1929, p. 81, t. 5 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. All three bands of the fore wing extend fully to the margin; costal band frequently with three red spots. Hind wing with very bright red ocelli and basal spots, but the colour soon fades and can even turn yellowish. Fresh specimens are a fine peach-red on the underside.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">East Spiti</span>: Tum-Tum-Thang Mts., 15,000 feet.</p>

<p>This form is here retained as a race provisionally.</p>

<p><b>93 <i>f</i>. Parnassius acco gemmifer</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius acco gemmifer</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1904 <i>b</i>, (Kambajong); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 34; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110; Verity, 1907-11, pp. 91, 318, pl. lviii, fig. 21 ({\female}); Avinoff, 1916, p. 353; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 61; O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 23, t. 5, fig. 5 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Distinguished from the western forms by the more strongly developed and darker markings. The marginal borders are much darker, and the ocelli of the hind wing are deeper red and more broadly ringed with black.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female},45-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>; very rare.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius charltonius</b> Gray.</p>

<p>A very large species, one of the finest in the genus.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with vein 10 from 7; veins 6 and 7 well separated at the origin; discal band usually broadened below the cell, the bases of areas 2 and 3 being usually entirely black; no red spot. Hind wing without a spot in base of area 7; a small red or black spot in middle of area 7; a very large red ocellus extending from vein 4 to vein 6, usually white-centred; a red or black basal bar above the anal angle in areas 1 and 2; a complete row of blue-centred black sub-marginal spots on a dark ground; a narrow black marginal line, more or less interrupted at the veins. {\female} pouch helici-from, being rolled upon itself, and furnished with a wide and longitudinal shallow groove. Markings more diaphanous than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;Flies on mountain slopes near glaciers; does not frequently settle, and when it does it rests on the bare peaks. This makes it, perhaps, the most difficult butterfly to capture in the Himalayas. The {\female} descends to a lower elevation than the {\male}. The butterfly is taken in July and August.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;Turkestan (South Ferghana) to the <span class="smallcaps">North-West Himalayas</span>; rare. Taken at about 14,000 to 19,000 feet.</p>

<p>Although less variable than most other species several names have been given to various forms. In the Indian area, besides the nominotypical race, three, other forms may be treated provisionally as subspecies.</p>

<p><b>94 <i>a</i>. Parnassius charltonius charltonius</b> Gray. (Fig. 106, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i>, Gray, 1852, p. 77, pl. xii, fig. 7 ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 126; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i> p. 35; Verity, 1907-11, pp. 84, 317, pl. A, fig. 17 (venation and pattern), pl. 3, fig. 11 (scales), pl. xxi, fig. 3 ({\female}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 62, pl. vi, fig. A 13.10 ({\male}).</p>

<p>Kailasius charltonius, Bryk, 1922, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Parnasius charltonius</i> ab. <i>mendica</i> Bryk, 1913 <i>b</i>, p. 153 (Ladak).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with the usual black cell-bar and discocellular bar; costal part of discal band parallel to the two former bars and a little wider than these, posterior part follows lower margin of cell, narrow between veins 3 and 5, but broadening out and directed distad from vein 3 to inner margin; post-discal band broad, narrowing to a point posteriorly, not reaching the rornus, and bent slightly inwards at vein 5; a broad, posteriorly narrowed, subhyaline marginal border. Hind wing with inner area as far as the anal bar broadly and densely irrorated with black; a short, oblique, pretornal dusky black bar, rarely red-centred; the large discal ocellus centred with white; a small black or slightly red spot in middle of area 7; a submarginal curved series of five velvety black spots, each touched inwardly with silvery, superposed on a broad subhyaline dusky band which is broadest in the middle; a dusky antemarginal line, interrupted at the veins. Cilia of both wings white. {\female} with broader markings and much larger red ocelli on the hind wing; the pretornal bar always red-centred.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}{\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ladak</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; rare. The type came from the country between Nepal and Tibet.</p>

<p><b>94 <i>b</i>. Parnassius charltonius ducalis</b> Boullet &amp; Le Cerf.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius ducalis</i>, Boullet &amp; Le Cerf. 1912, p. 143 (Chitral); Bollow, 1929, p. 83.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> ab. <i>parnassiomimus</i>, Bryk, 1913 <i>b</i>, p. 162 (Chitral).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> ab. <i>occidentalis</i>, Bryk, 1912, p. 10.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The black markings more sharply defined and better developed than in the nominotypical form. The development of the black dusting from the base of inner margin to the anal ocellus on hind wing is striking, and the enlarged, rather elongate ocelli, with their bright carmine-red colour, always without white centres, are characteristic; the submarginal band with its blue ocelli separated by a narrow band from the marginal band.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span>. Taken at 14,000 feet, from June to August.</p>

<p><b>94 <i>c</i>. Parnassius charltonius deckerti</b> Verity.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius deckerti</i>, Verity, 1907-11, p. 85 (note), p. 317, pl. xix, fig. 14, {\female} (Kashmir, 4,200-4,800 m.).</p>

<p><i>Kailasius charltonius</i> {\female} var. <i>deckerti</i>, Bryk, 1913 <i>b</i>. t. 4, figs. 1 (type), 2, 3.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> (part.), Moore (<i>non</i> Gray), 1879 <i>b</i>, pp. 5, 17, pl. i, fig. 3 ({\female}); id., 1882, p. 257.</p>

<p><i>Kailasius charltonius</i> (part.), Moore (<i>non</i> Gray), 1902, p. 118 pl. 411, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>, 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> ab. <i>haudei</i>, Bryk, 1912, p. 5 (Kashmir) id., 1913 <i>b</i>, p. 150, t. 4, fig. 4 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> ab. <i>flavomaculata</i>, Bryk, 1912, p. 8 (Kashmir).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour pale white. The ocelli much distended and of blood-red coloration; the inner side of the ring of the median ocellus is much enlarged and contrasts with the otherwise narrow black ring; anal spot the same colour as the ocelli. On the fore wing the post-discal band is more distinctly interrupted at vein 5 than in the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span>, 12,000 to 14,000 feet.</p>

<p><b>94 <i>d</i>. Parnassius charltonius bryki</b> Haude. (Fig. 107, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius bryki</i>, Haude, 1912, p. 75, figs. 1-3 ({\female}) (Nilang Pass); Bryk, 1912, p. 65; id., 1913 <i>b</i>, p. 153, t. 5, fig. 7 ({\male}); O. Bang-Haas, 1927, p. 37, t. iii, fig. 12 ({\female}); Bollow, 1929, p. 83.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> (part.), Verity (<i>non</i> Cray), 1907, pl. xxi, fig. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius charltonius</i> ab. <i>atroguttata</i>, Bryk, 1912, p. 8 (Nilang Pass); id., 1913 <i>b</i>, t. 5, fig. 6.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Smaller than <i>deckerti</i> Verity and the nominotypical form, with a transverse costal band like the later, but the arcs of the same are more rounded than pointed. Hind wing more densely dusted, and therefore appears lighter; submarginal band somewhat reduced, but the submarginal ocelli well developed, no touching the median or anal ocelli; the ocelli are smaller than in <i>ducalis</i> Bou. &#x2014; Le Cerf and <i>deckerti Verity</i>.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Spiti</span>: Nilang Pass, 14,000 feet; Tauling Pass to Shipki Pass; the Tum-Tum-Thang Mts.</p>

<p><b>Family PIERID{\AE}.</b></p>

<p><i>Pierid{\ae}</i>, Duponchel, 1844, p. 23; Moore, 1904, p. 118; Verity, 1907, p. 109; Bingham, 1907, p. 134; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 39; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 119; Bell, 1912, pp. 1131-45 (Key to Indian species and general account); Klots, 1931, p. 139; id., 1932, p. 205.</p>

<p>Egg.&#x2014;Cylindrical, narrowed near the apex, twice as high as broad, with longitudinal ribs which are connected by fine transverse ridges. Usually white at first, changing to yellow or orange. Those of <i>Cepora</i> are spotted with red, and those of <i>Leptosia</i> are whitish to blue.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Cylindrical, smooth or slightly hairy as a rule, the hairs short and fairly dense, each arising from a minute tubercle. Usually some shade of green with pale longitudinal stripes. In <i>Delias</i> there are tufts of fairly long hair.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.&#x2014;Angulate, the head pointed, sometimes produced into a long snout. Usually attached by the cremaster and a silken girdle. Some are suspended as in the Papilios (e. g. <i>Catopsilia</i>), others are fastened to a leaf or other surface horizontally (e. g. <i>Pieris</i>).</p>

<p>The pup{\ae} of the suspended type are smooth, with bulging wings. These include <i>Leptosia, Catopsilia, Ixias, Hebomoia, Terias, Colotis, Valeria</i>, The pup{\ae} of the second type have dorsal teeth, the thorax angled in the dorsal line, and the head produced to a snout that is usually up-curved. These include <i>Delias, Prioneris, Anapheis, Appias, Cepora, Colias,</i> and <i>Pieris</i>.</p>

<p><i>Imago</i>.&#x2014;Fore wing with veins 10 and 11 usually from the cell, rarely is 10 absent; 9 usually present; 7 usually coincident with 8 and stalked with 9, 6 usually stalked with them; 5 usually from above middle of cell; 1 <i>a</i> not forked at the base. Hind wing with veins 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i> present, the inner area broad, with the margin channelled to receive the abdomen; precostal absent or reduced in some genera. Both wings with cell closed; discocellular (<i>udc</i>) usually absent on the fore wing.</p>

<p>The venation is more variable in the fore wing, development having proceeded by an upward movement of the veins, resulting in the fusion and apparent loss of some; the more primitive forms have veins 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 all present. In <i>Baltia</i> vein 5 has moved up, leaving only one discocellular (<i>ldc</i>) present. The position of veins 7+8 and 9 is variable, these two veins being sometimes very short and forming a minute fork at the apex of the wing; in <i>Leptosia</i> vein 9 has disappeared, in <i>Delias</i> vein 10 is missing, whilst in <i>Colias</i> vein 10 is stalked with 9. Generally, however, veins 10 and 11 are more stable than the three preceding veins.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} of variable length, the club more or less ovate (abrupt), or short and thickened (increassate) gradually to the apex.</p>

<p>Legs fully developed, claws bifid; paronychium absent in <i>Colias</i> and <i>Baltia</i>; pulvillus absent in <i>Gonepteryx, Colias</i>, and <i>Baltia</i>.</p>

<p>Scent-organs are found inthe males of many genera, e.g. brands (<i>Colias</i>), plume-scales (<i>Delias, Pieris</i>), abdominal brushes (<i>Appias</i>).</p>

<p>The genitalia of all the genera, excepting one, have been inverstigated by Klots (1931, 1932), and various genera have been examined by other workers. The genitalia of <i>Delias</i> have been fully worked out by Talbot (1929 <i>a</i>), and of <i>Eurema</i> by Corbet and Pendlebury (1932). Considerable taxonomic use has been made of these structures, and even in the case geographical races deviations have been found. It is also true that some species, known to be distinct on other grounds, possess quite similar genitalia, at least in the {\male}. The following summary of the characters is given by Mehta (1933 <i>b</i>):&#x2014;</p>

<p>``Valv{\ae} simple, very broad, harpe well developed, digitate (e.g. <i>Terias hecabe</i> Linn.); costal margin fused. Cucullus narrow (e. g. <i>Delias</i>). Tegumen broad. Uncus acuminate. Saccus short. Penis long, slightly bent or with basal digitate processes (e. g. <i>Appias nero</i> Fabr.). Cornuti variable.''</p>

<p>It may be noted that the simple acuminate uncus is rare in the genus <i>Delias</i>, three lobes being usually present.</p>

<p>Coloration very largely white, with black markings, for which reason the species of this family have acquired the distinctive appellation of ``the whites.'' The underside is usually more brightly coloured. There is considerable variation of pattern and an extensive formation of geographical races. Most species exhibit seasonal forms, many are strongly dimorphic, and the {\female} is sometimes polymorphic.</p>

%%%%%% 332 page
<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>


</body>
</html>
