<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
	<title>Butterflies</title>
	<link href="style.css" media="screen" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>

<!--477-645-->

<p class="subsection">151 <i>d</i> <b>Ixias pyrene familiaris</b> Butler.</p>

<p><i>Ixias familiaris</i>, Butler, 1874 <i>a</i>, p. 432 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene pirenassa</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 159; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 81.</p>

<p><i>Thestias rhexia</i>, Butler (<i>non</i> Fabricius), 1869 <i>a</i>, p. 216, pl. 1, fig. 5 ({\female}); id., 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 136.</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrence</i> f. <i>rhexia</i>, R\dd{o}ber (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1907, p. 58, t. 23 <i>g</i> (wet form); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 159, t. 71 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 71 c ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene</i> Watson, 1891, p. 52; id., 1894, pp. 503-8; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 591; de Nic\'eville, 1898 <i>b</i>, p. 152, pl. AA, figs. 29, 30 (gynandromorph, Sikkim); Bingham, 1907, p. 193 (part.), pl. xviii, fig. 120 (dry form).</p>

<p>{\male}. Usually larger than the preceding races.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the orange band entering lower angle of cell; the yellow ground-colour does not enter the base of area 3 and only the extreme base of area 2.</p>

<p>{\female}. Very variable. Sometimes nearly entirely suffused with black on a white ground, with the apical band white (typical form); or the ground-colour may be yellow and the band white.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam;</span> common.</p>

<p class="subsection">151 <i>e</i> <b>Ixias pyrene latifasciata</b> Butler.</p>

<p><i>Ixias latifasciata</i>, Butler, 1871 <i>a</i>, p. 252, pl. xix, fig. 3 ({\male}, Moulmein); id., 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 137; Sinhoe, 1909, p. 111, pl. 587, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Ixias moulmeinensis</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 837 ({\male}{\female}, Moulmein to Meetan); Watson, 1894, p. 505, pl. ii, fig. 26; id., 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 669; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 139; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 113, pl. 588, figs. 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}, dry form), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>d</i> ({\male}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene latifasciata</i> f. <i>moulneinensis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 159, t. 72 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female})</p>

<p>{\male}. Smaller than <i>familiaris</i> Butl., and more or less intermediate between this and <i>kausala</i> Moore. The orange band does not enter the lower edge of the cell.</p>

<p>{\female}. The band is yellow or orange and the ground-colour often white.</p>

<p>The name <b>moulmeinensis</b> Moore refers to the dry form.</p> 

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Northern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to the Dawna Range; common.</p>

<p class="subsection">151 <i>f</i>  <b>Ixias pyrene meipona</b> Grose-Smith.</p>

<p><i>Ixias meipona</i>, Grose-Smith, 1887 <i>b</i> <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>>, p. 296 (Burma); Smith &amp; Kirby, 1889, <i>Pieris</i>, ii, figs. 4, 5 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene meipona</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82.</p>

<p>{\male}. A much paler race, with lemon-yellow ground-color. Fore wing with orange area often clouded, presenting a dull frosted appearance.</p>

<p>{\female} The band is orange, and the cell of fore wing more or less black.</p>

<p>This race is more constant than is usual in <i>pyrene</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;The Dawna Range to <span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> common.</p>

<p><b>Ixias verna</b> Druce.</p>

<p>{\male}. Creamy-white, with yellow tinge. Fore wirg with the inner edge of black area bordered with lemon-yellow; the subapical band is distinctly yellow and dull.</p>

<p>{\female}. Creamy-white or with restricted yellow tinge. Fore wing with narrow band.</p>

<p>In the race from the Andamans the band on the fore wing is orange</p>

<p>The specific distinctness of this species, separated from <i>pyrene</i> by Bingham (1907), has been recently confirmed by Corbet (1937). No differences in the genitalia or scent-scales are to be found in the two species, but they occur together and the pattern is sufficiently distinct.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Lower</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span> to the Malay Peninsula, Siam, and Sabanga  Island. Three subspecies, two of which occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p class="subsection">152 <i>a</i>  <b>Ixias verna verna</b> Druce.</p>

<p><i>Ixias verna</i>, Druce, 1874, p. 108, pl. xvi, figs. 5, 6 ({\male}{\female}, Siam); Moore, 1886, p. 49 (Mergui Islands); Watson, 1894, pp. 503-567; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 142; Bingham, 1907, p. 195.</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene verna</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 159, t. 71 <i>e.</i></p>

<p><i>Ixias verna verna</i>, Corbet, 1937, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Ixias citrina</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 837 ({\male}, Tenasserim); id., 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 48 (King Island).</p>

<p><i>Ixias verna</i> f. <i>citrina</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 195; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 114, pl. 588, figs. 2 ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (wet form), fig. 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Ixias pallida</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 837 (Upper Tenasserim); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 142; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 111, pl. 587, figs. 1 <i>d, e, f, g</i> ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>wet-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white, apical half of fore wing and outer margin of hind wing black. The white ground-colour suffused with very pale sulphur-yellow; this colour deepens to a pure sulphur along the margins of the areas occupied by the ground-colour. Fore wing with base shaded with blackish scales; apical half with a large oblique orange patch that occupies the middle of area 2, the basal two-thirds or more of areas 3 to 6, 10 and 11, and extends into the apex of cell, where it is interrupted by a black discocellular spot; this in some specimens <i>(I. pallida</i> Moore) entirely fills the lower angle of cell.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> sulphur-yellow, the fore wing posteriorly below the cell much paler; both wings with sparsely scattered fusco-ferruginous strig{\ae} and minute dots; the discocellular spot the most prominent</p>

<p>{\female}. Somewhat similar to the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> with pale sulphur-yellow ground-colour much restricted; on the fore wing it extends only over the basal two-thirds of areas 1 <i>a</i> 1 <i>b</i> and the basal fourth of area 2; the orange patch much narrower and irregular, forming beyond apex of cell a short curved band that does not quite reach the costal margin; a large elongate orange spot, bearing a small black spot in its outer part, in area 3; a smaller orange spot, proximally deeply incurved, in area 2. Hind wing with black outer border wider than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the {\male}, the strig{\ae} more numerous, the discocellular spots much larger, and an obscure discal series of transverse reddish spots on both wings; fore wing with a very large and prominent patch of reddish-brown above the tornus.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>citrina</b> Moore.&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with orange patch slightly wider. Hind wing with narrower marginal border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of both wings with more or less prominent transverse discal series of reddish-brown spots, centred with white, the strig{\ae} and dots more abundant. Antenn{\ae} deep reddish-brown, head and thorax anteriorly with a little reddish-brown pubescence; abdomen above black, pale yellowish-white beneath.</p>

<p><i>Expanse: {\male}{\female}, 50-60 mm.</i></p>

<p>The name <i>pallida</i> Moore refers to an intermediate form which approaches the wet form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Lower</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span>  and Malay Peninsula; rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">152 <i>b</i> <b>Ixias verna andamana</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Ixias andamana</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 590 ({\male}{\female} South Andamans); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i> p. 251; Smith &amp; Kirby, 1889, <i>Ixias</i>, p. 1, pl. 1-3 ({\male}{\female}); Watson, 1894, pp. 503-7; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i> p. 142; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 109, pl. 586, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, wet form).</p>

<p><i>Ixias verna andamana</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 195.</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene andamana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 159, t. 72 <i>a;</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82.</p>

<p><i>Ixias lena</i>, Swinhoe, <i>a</i> p. 357 (Andamans); Watson, 1894, pp. 507-24; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 110, pl. 586, figs. 1 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form), 1 <i>e, f, g</i> ({\male}{\female}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Ixias pyrene andamana</i> f. <i>lena</i> Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 159.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Closely resembles the nominotypical form both in wet and dry-season specimens, but is larger, with brighter colours. The orange band is a rich orange-red and pro-portionately narrower than in the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>lena</b> Swinh.&#x2014;The ferruginous descal series of spots, and on the fore wing the reddish-brown tornal patch characteristic of dry-season specimens, very conspicuous and prominent.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Anaaman Islands;</span> common.</p>

<p><center>Genus <b>COLOTIS</b> H\dd{u}bner. (Fig. 156).</center></p>

<p><i>Colotis</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 97; Scudder, 1875, p. 146 (type, <i>amata</i> Fabricius); Bingham, 1907, p. 259; Bell, 1912, p. 1138 (Key to Indian species); Evans, 1923, p. 259; Talbot, 1931, p. 228 (type, <i>amata</i> Fabr.); Klots, 1931, p. 194 (type, <i>amata</i> Fabr.); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 82; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i> p. 133 (type, <i>calais</i> Stoll, 1781,=<i>amata</i> Fabr., 1775); Peile, 1937, p. 71.</p>

<p><i>Aphrodite</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 95; Hemming, 1934 <i>c</i>, p. 38 (nom. pr{\ae}oce.; type, <i>eborea</i> Stoll.=<i>dan{\ae}</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus</i>, Swainson, 1833, pl. cxv; Butler, 1870 <i>a</i> pp. 36, 47, pl. ii, fig. 6 (venation); id., 1876 <i>b</i>, pp. 127-65 (revision); id., 1897 <i>b</i> pp. 385, 451, 495 (revision); Watson, 1894, p. 517; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 56; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 173; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 133 (type, <i>subfasciatus</i> Swains.).</p>

<p><i>Idmais</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 584; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 134 (type, <i>chrysonome</i> Klug, 1829).</p>

<p><i>Callosune</i>, Doubleday, 1847, p. 57; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 128; Hemming 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 134 (type, <i>dan{\ae}</i> Fabricius, 1775).</p>

<p><i>Madais</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 152 (type, <i>fausta</i> Oliv.); Klots, 1931, p. 194 (=subgenus).</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>C. calais</i> (Cram.) [=<i>C. amata</i> (Fabr.)]. {\male} Fore wing with costa very slightly arched; apex obtuse, rounded, slightly convex; tornus abtuse but well marked; inner margin slightly or moderately convex or sinuate, abou<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>t three-fourths the length of costa; cell about half length of wing wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell, emitted moderately close together; 7+8 and 9 stalked at more than half-way from end of cell to apex; 6 from upper angle of cell or from near base of stalk of 7+8 and 9; <i>udc</i> absent, <i>mdc</i> usually at least half as long as <i>Idc.</i> Hind wing with costa arched; apex rounded; outer margin slightly arched; tornus obtuse but well marked; inner margin slightly convex; cell not half length of wing; precostal vein long, bent distad; vein 7 from the cell well distad; 5 and 6 either from the cell separately or connate or stalked; <i>Idc</i> oblique, concave, usually more than twice as long as <i>mdc.</i> Antenn{\ae} short, not half the length of the fore wing, club abrupt and spatulate head tufted anteriorly; palpus with third segment short, slender, acute at apex; eyes naked; body moderately robust.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p>The forms arranged under this genus, with the exception perhaps of those that belong to the genus <i>Eurema</i>, are, of all Pierid{\ae}, the most variable, seasonal and sexual dimorphism being very pronounced. As in <i>Ixias</i>, all transitions are found between the extreme wet-season and dry-season broods. The genus has its headquarters in Africa, where it is no less variable in India.</p>

<p>The species frequent hot and dry districts, and fly restlessly over the plains in the hot sunshine, or sail up and down rocky slopes. Many species are very abundant.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;North Africa; Africa, south of the Sahara; Palestine and Arabia to Persia, <span class="smallcaps">North-West Inala, Penin-Sular India</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> Over 60 species are known in the genus, and of these seven are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><center><i>Key to Species.</i></center></p>

<p>1. Upperside of fore wing with a prominent discocellular spot which connects with the dark costal border ... .. ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Upperside of fore wing with the discocellular spot, if present, not connected with the dark if present, not connected with the dark costal border .. ... ..</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>2. Upperside of fore wing with the outer border shifted in area 1 <i>b</i> so as to enclose a large pale spot; {\female} may be white .. .</p>

<p><i>calais</i> (Cram.), p. 452.</p>

<p>Upperside of fore wing with outer marginal border regular to inner margin, bearing no pale spot below vein 3... ... .</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>3. Upperside ground-colour salmon-pink in both sexes; hind wing with broad immaculate outer black border .. .</p>

<p>[(Butl.), p. 456.</p>

<p><i>phisadia protractus</i></p>

<p>Upperside ground-colour white. Fore wing with a white submarginal spot on the black border in area 3 .. .. ...</p>

<p><i>vestalis</i> (Butl.), p. 457.</p>

<p>4. Upperside orange-pink; {\female} may be white. Hind wing upperside unmarked except for dark marginal spots or border .</p>

<p><i>fausta</i> (Oilv.), p. 460.</p>

<p>Upperside white; apical area of fore wing crimson or orange. {\female} with hind wing upperside bearing a more or less distinct dark discal band, always indicated at costa . ... .. .. ...</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>5. Fore wing apical area crimson. {\female} with apical patch crimson to pale red, divided by a dark macular band</p>

<p><i>dan{\ae}</i> (Fabr.), p. 469.</p>

<p>Fore wing apical area orange</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>6. Fore wing with orange patch edged with black on the inner side .. .. .</p>

<p><i>etida</i> (Boisd.), p. 464.</p>

<p>Fore wing in {\male} with orange patch not edged with black on inner side, or only very faintly .. ... .. ....</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>7. Fore wing upperside with a discocellular dot. {\female} with fore wing bearing a post-discal band from costa to vein 3, strongly angled at vein 5. ... ... ....</p>

<p><i>euchais</i> (Fabr.), p. 467.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside without a discocellular dot. {\female} fore wing without a post-discal band</p>

<p><i>liagore</i> (Klug), p. 472.</p>

<p><b>Colotis calais</b> (Cramer, 1775).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female} <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour salmon-pink. Fore wing with a dark costal border which reaches a prominent discocellular spot; a pale submarginal spot in area 1<i>b</i>, where the black border projects inwards. Hind wing with a broad outer black border bearing more or less distinct spots of the ground-colour.</p>

<p>A second form of {\female} occurs in which the ground-colour is pale primrose-yellow to pure white.</p>

<p>This species is, perhaps, better known as <i>anata</i> Faber., but both were described in the same year, and preference is given to Cramer, who figured the insect.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Africa south of the Sahara, Arabia, Syria to Persia, <span class="smallcaps">North-West India, Bombay</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">United Provinces.</span> Four subspecies, of which two are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus modestus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 137 (Ceylon); Watson, 1894, pp. 519, 526.</p>

<p><i>Idmais modestus</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 131, pl. xlix, figs. 2 ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i> ({\female} form).</p>

<p><i>Colotis modesta</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 143, pl. 598, figs. 3 ({\male}), 3 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}, dry form); Ormiston, 1924, p. 92.</p>

<p><i>teracolus amata modesta</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 173, t. 73 <i>b</i> (imago).</p>

<p><i>Colotis amata modesta</i>, Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82, pl. ix, fig. B 18.1 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 71.</p>

<p><i>Colotis amata</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1907, p. 261 (part.); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, pp. 385, 426 (Palni Hills); Ormistion, 1917, p. 137; Bell, 1914, p. 73, pl. J, fig. 68 ({\male}) (early stages).</p>

<p><i>Colotis amata</i> {\female} f. <i>albina</i>, Evans, 1912 <i>a</i>, pp. 559, 980.</p>

<p><i>Colotis amata modesta</i> {\female} f. <i>albina</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82.</p>

<p><i>Papilio calais</i>, Stoll (<i>non</i> Cramer, 1775), 1781, p. 118, pl. cccli, figs. A-D (Coromandel).</p>

<p>{\male}. Distinguished from the nominotypical  form by the fore wing upperside having the tornal spot in area 1<i>b</i> smaller and not quadrate; the pale marginal spots are also small.</p>

<p>{\female}. In two forms. One resembles the {\male}. and the other has a white upperside (<b>albina</b> Evans).</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;A truncated cone, with longitudinal channels, and fine, transverse stri{\ae}. White at first, turning yellow later.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;5th instar. Bright grass-green, with a broad white dorsal line, generally showing the transverse lines of the segments as slight depressions throughout its length; sometimes a fine light, very thin spiracular line. Length, 20 mm.; breadth, 3 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;The snout conical, equilateral, its base being reckoned as the whole pupal diameter at the front margin of segment 2; the real snout is only the very extremity of this cone, and it is very short. Cremaster nearly square, gently concave at the end, depressed dorsally between slightly prominent subdorsal ridges, slightly depressed ventrally between the rounded marginal ridges, each slightly prominent extensor-ridge ending anteriorly in a little point or sharp tooth; the suspensory hooklets are arranged in a dense mass all along the posterior margin. Colour green, with the lateral outline along the wings yellow. Length, 16 mm.; breadth. 3.5 mm.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid on the upperside of a leaf, there being from 50 to 60 in a batch.The larv{\ae} are gregarious, eat voraciously, and grow very fast. Eggs obtained on 25th July emerged next day; larv{\ae} pupated on 2nd August; imago emerged on 6th August. The caterpillars feed in rows along the edge of a leaf, lying close pressed one against the other, and continue thus up to the last stage, when they become more independent though still keeping in batches. Each larva goes off to pupate separately The first meal is the egg-shell. Food-plants: <i>Salvadora persica</i> Linn. and <i>S. oleoides</i> Decne., 
<i>Azima tetracantha</i> Lam., all of the family Salvadorace{\ae}.</p>

<p>The butterfly has a fluttering flight, fairly straight and horizontal. it does not often frequent flowers, and keeps usually near the ground, being fond of open sunny places. The food-plant grows especially in waste desert places.</p>

<p>In a brood of about 50 there will always be a couple of white females, and this seems to be quite independent of climate. in damp areas the black markings on the upperside are larger and more intense.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Bengal;</span> not rare.</p>

<p class="subsection">153 <i>b.</i>  <b>Colotis calais amata</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 158, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio amata</i>, Fabricius, 1775, p. 476.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus amata</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 138; Nurse, 1896, p. 245 (early stages); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 572; Marshall, 1897, p. 9; Bingham, 1907, p. 261 (part.); fraser, 1911, pp. 867-9 (Sind); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh).</p> 

<p><i>Colotis amata</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 261 (part.); Fraser, 1911, pp. 867-9 (Sind); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus amata amata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 173.</p>

<p><i>Colotis amata amata</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 200 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 47, pl. vii, fig. 47 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilia cypr{\ae}a</i>, Fabricius, 1787, p. 22.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus cypr{\ae}a</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 138 (Bombay); Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 359; Watson, 1894, pp. 519, 526.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus calais</i>, Yerbury (<i>non</i> Cramer), 1892, p. 214; Watson, 1894, pp. 519, 526.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus carnifer</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 138, pl. vii, figs. 8, 9 ({\male}, Punjab); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 509 (Karachi); Watson, 1894, pp. 519, 526.</p>

<p><i>Colotis carnifer</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 145, pl. 598, figs. 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus kennedii</i>, Swinhoe, 1884, <i>a</i>, p. 440 (Ahmadnagar); id., 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 143; Watson, 1894, pp. 518, 526.</p>

<p><i>Colotis kennedii</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 143, pl. 598, figs. 1 <i>e</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>f</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Idmais dynamene</i>, Aitken (<i>non</i> Klug), 1887, p. 39 (Cutch); Swinhoe, 1887, p. 277 (Karachi); id., 1909, p. 144, pl. 598, figs. 2 ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (wet form).</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> salmon-pink. Fore wing with costa black, thickly overlaid with greyish or pinkish scales; a black discocellular spot, which may be large and quadrate or smaller and lunate; outer margin broadly black, bearing a double series of spots of the ground-colour; the inner series of these spots consists of a large spot in area 1 <i>b</i>, two very small spots in 2 and 3, one in each, and four large anterior spots placed in a curve; the spots in the outer series are variable in number, usually one in each area, and more or less linear in shape. Hind wing with a band of dense black specialized scales (androconia) on the costal margin, extended to just within the upper edge of the cell; this band joins a broad, similarly coloured marginal band of ordinary scales that becomes more or less diffuse posteriorly, and encloses a double series of small spots of the ground-colour; the inner series of these spots is often obsolescent or sometimes absent; inner area heavily dusted with fuscous, extending to the disc, which has therefore generally a greyish appearance.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> greenish-yellow; an anticiliary fine black line on both wings; the black markings of the upperside show through. Fore wing with a black discocellular spot, variable in size and sometimes absent; a submarginal quadrate black spot in area ! <i>b</i>, and another (sometimes faintly marked or absent) further outwards in area 2; disc faintly and inner margin very broadly salmon-pink. Hind wing sparsely dusted with black; a small black discocellular spot. Cilia of both wings pale salmon-pink. Antenn{\de}, head, thorax, and abdomen black, the antenn{\ae} head, thorax, and abdomen black, the antenn{\ae} speckled with white, the head and thorax covered with greenish-fuscous hairs; underside of palpi green, of thorax and abdomen white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the {\male}, but the ground-colour very much paler and more ochraceous than green. Some specimens have on the fore wing an anterior post-discal curved fuscous band. Hind wing with discocellular spot larger than in the {\male}, and annular; a curved discal series of reddish spots from costa to inner margin.</p>

<p>\figure</p>

<p>The name <b>carnifer</b> (Butl.) may be applied to the dry-season form.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 35-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bombay</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sind</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> and <span class="smallcaps">United Provinces;</span> not rare. Also extends to Persia and Syria. According to Fraser (1911) the insect is common in Sind all the year round, and has been taken ``<i>in cop.''</i> with <i>vestalis</i> (Butl.) and <i>protractus</i> (Butl.).</p>

<p><b>Colotis phisadia</b> (Godart, 1819).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}.<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing salmon-pink. Both wings with a broad black outer border, which on the hind wing is without markings. Both wings with bluish-grey basal suffusion.</p>

<p>{\male}. Hind wing with a large salmon-coloured patch of modified scales at the base of area 7. {\male} fore wing underside with a small patch of modified scales near base of area 1 <i>b.</i></p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Algeria to Kenya and Arabia, Palestine to Peria and <span class="smallcaps">North-west India.</span> One subspecies in the Indian area</p>

<p class="subsection">154. <b>Colotis phisadia protractus</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus protractus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 137 (Punjab); id., 1880 <i>b</i>, p. 222 (Baluchistan); id., 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 609; Aitken, 1887, p. 40; Watson, 1894, p. 520; Marshall, 1897, p. 10; Sharpe, 1898, p. 9, pl. ii, figs. 1, <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i>; Nurse, 1899, p. 513; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 173</p>

<p><i>Colotis protractus</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 263; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 146, pl. 599, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}); Fraser, 1911, p. 868 (early stages, Sind); Bell, 1914, p. 76; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 200 (Baluchistan).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus semiramis</i>, Grum-Grshima\dd{i}lo, 1902, p. 190 (Persia).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> rich salmon-pink. Fore wing with base bluish-grey; a costal black border joined to a marginal black area occupying the outer fourth of the wing; inner edge of this outer area irregular, extended slightly and squarely inwards in areas 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i>, and 3; a prominent oval discicellular black spot, connected anteriorly with the costal spot; sub-apical bluish-grey spots in areas 3, 4, 5, 6, and 9. Hind wing with distal half black; inner margin white; an inner posterior band of somewhat diffuse blush-grey scaling from base to the outer black area.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> light greenish-yellow; discal area tinged with salmon-pink, which is more conspicuous on the fore wing. Fore wing with a prominent black discicellular spot; three submarginal black spots, more or less quadrate, decreasing in size anteriorly, in areas 1 <i>b</i>, 2, and 3, the spot in 1 <i>b</i> extended into 1 <i>a</i> and lengthened posteriorly outward to outer margin. Hind wing unmarked. Cilia of both wings pale salmon-pink. Antenn{\ae} brownish-black, ringed or spotted with white; head, thorax, and abdomen black, the thorax anteriorly with whitish hairs at the sides; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen pale yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> resembles the {\male}, the black areas dark silky brown; on the fore wing edged interiorly along the costa and along outer margin from vein 2 anteriorly with jet-black; discocellular spot on fore wing much larger than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with base and cell anteriorly greenish-yellow; disc salmon-pink; apex and outer margin broadly dull ochraceous-pink; other markings much as in the {\male}. Hind wing ochraceous-pink.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female} 40-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Fraser</i>, 1911):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are pure white and strongly ribbed. They are laid singly, and hatch on the third day.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;At first grass-green with crimson strippling along the sides. Final instar grass-green, sprinkled with white dots and tiny bristles. A white dorsal line, with or without yellow edging. The only Indian species in which the head is not black in the first instar.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Stout, with a short snout. Creamy, flesh-coloured, or pale green without markings.</p>

<p>Food-plant: <i>Salvadora persica</i> Linn.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Cutch</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Sind</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Punjab;</span> not rare. According to Fraser (1911) this insect is common in Sind all the year round. Also occurs in Persia.</p>

<p>The nominotypical form does not occur in India, and the supposed records of such are not properly authenticated.</p>

<p><b>Colotis vestalis</b> (Butler)</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Distinguished by its white <i>upperside</i> with broad outer marginal black borders, the fore wing bearing a prominent submarginal white spot in srea 3.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Kenya to Abyssinia; the Persian Gulf to <span class="smallcaps">West</span> and <span class="smallcaps">North-West India.</span> Two subspecies, one African, and the other, the nominotypical form, found in India. It will be noted that the distribution is discontinuous.</p>

<p class="subsection">155. <b>Colotis vestalis vestalis</b> (Butler). (Fig. 159, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus vestalis</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 135, pl. vii, fig. 10 ({\male}, Scind); id., 1880 <i>b</i>, p. 222 (Baluchistan and Karachi); id., 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 608 (Karachi); id., 1883, p. 152 (Karachi); id., 1897 <i>b</i>, p. 390; Watson, 1894, pp. 520, 526; Marshall, 1897, p. 11; Sharpe, 1898, p. 18, pl. vi, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i>, 1 <i>f</i>; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174, t. 73 <i>e.</i></p>

<p><i>Colotis vestais</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 265, fig. 69 ({\male}); Evans, 1910 <i>b</i>, p. 426; Fraser, 1911, p. 868 (Sind, early stages); Bell, 1914, p. 78 (early stages); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 82, pl. ix, fig. B 18.3 ({\male}); id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 200; Peile, 1937, p. 72, pl. vii, fig. 48 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus puellaris</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 136 (Punjab); id., 1880 <i>b</i>, p. 222 (Baluchistan); id., 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 608 (W. India); id., 1883, p. 152 (Karachi); Swinhoe, 1887, p. 276 (Karachi); Aitken, 1887, p. 40 (Kharaghora); Watson, 1894, p. 521; Marshall, 1897, p. 10; Sharpe, 1898, p. 16, pl. v, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>d</i>; Dixey, 1902, p. 157, pl. vii, figs. 13 ({\male}, 14 ({\female}) (wet form).</p>

<p><i>Colotis puellaris</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 149, pl. 599, figs. 3, 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 3 <i>a</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus ochreipennis</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 136 (Punjab); id., 1881, p. 609 (Karachi); id., 1883, p. 152 (Karachi); Watson, 1894, pp. 521, 526; Dixey, 1902, p. 157, pl. vii, figs. 15 ({\male}), 16 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Colotis ochreipennis</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 149, pl. 599, figs. 3 <i>d</i> <i>f</i> ({\male}), 
 <i>e</i>, <i>g</i> ({\female}).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus intermissus</i>, Butler, 1883, p. 152, pl. xxiv, fig. 4 ({\male}, Karachi); Watson, 1894, pp. 521, 526.</p>
 
 <p><i>Colotis intermissus</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 151, pl. 600, figs. 2, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 2 <i>d</i>, <i>f</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>e</i>, <i>g</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus rorus</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i>, p. 438, pl. xxxix, fig. 8 ({\male}, North Sind); id., 1909, p. 149 (=<i>ochreipennis</i> Butl.).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus peelus</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i>, p. 439, pl. xxxix, fig 9 ({\male}, Karachi); id., 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 509; id., 1909, p. 151.</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus vestalis ab. peelus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174.</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus dubius</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i> p. 439 (Karachi).</p>
 
 <p><i>Colotis dubius</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 150, pl. 600, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (=wet form).</p>
 
 <p><i>Wet-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white; both wings with broad outer black borders. Fore wing with the base, costal margin broadly, and the cell, except at its lower angle, heavily dusted with dusky grey; a short black streak at upper angle of cell joined to a large discocellular black spot; two small white subapical spots; a large submarginal white spot in area 3; minute marginal white specks, more or less obsolescent, in the areas. Hind wing more uniform, very slightly dusted with grey at the base, the black outer border immaculate.</p>
 
 <p>figure</p>
 
 <p><i>Underside</i> greenish-yellow sparsely sprinkled with black. Fore wing with pale yellow discal area, fading to white along inner margin; a discocellular black spot; three black submarginal posterior, placed in a curve; the lowest spot of these three sometimes extended to inner margin (<i>F puellaris</i>). Hind wing uniform, with a very small annular discocellular spot. Cilia white. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; antenn{\ae} speckled and tipped with white, thorax clothed with long bluish-grey hairs; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>
 
<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> resembles the {\male}, the marginal borders more brownish than black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with base and area of cell white suffused with greenish-yellow; costa and apex pale ochraceous; black spots as in the {\male}. Hind wing pale ochraceous; sometimes an anterior, discal, somewhat obscure, macular, incomplete band.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>ochreipennis</b> (Butl.).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Similar to the wet form, but on the <i>upperside</i> the black markings are duller and narrower.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with costal and apical areas on fore wing and whole surface of hind wing pale ochraceousto dark reddish-ochraceous.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 40-50 mm.</p>

<p>The names <i>puellaris</i> Butl. and <i>dubius</i> Swinh. are synonyms of the nominotypical form. The names <i>rorus</i> Swinh. and <i>intermissus</i> Butl. are synonyms of the dry form <i>ochreipennis</i> Butl.</p>

<p>The form <b>peelus</b> (Swinh.) is a dry-season form, and has the <i>upperside</i> ground-colour pale canary-yellow.</p>

<p>There is a symmetrical gynandromorph from Karachi in the British Museum (ex coll. Oberth\dd{u}r). </p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly, generally near the base of the plant on old leaves. White at first, turning yellowish, with three broad reddish lateral bands. Long, dome-shaped, with 16 to 18 longitudinal ribs, the points of twelve forming a low crown round the micropyle.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Segments 2, 13, and 14 somewhat more narrowed than those of <i>amata;</i> segments 4 to 12 stout and cylindrical. Early instars grass-green with an indication of a spiracular light line. Anal flap rather large, dorsally somewhat flattened, and somewhat flanged round the edges. The yellow spots on the body are minute tubercles. Final instar identical with that of <i>protractus.</i></p>

<p>In the first instar, according to Fraser (1911), the head is shining jet-black; body grass-green with crimson stippling laterally, which on the posterior three segments spreads upwards and meets that of the opposite side so as to form a more or less prominent crimson patch</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Rather stout, the snout shorter than usual in this genus, and somewhat bluntly rounded at the tip. A dorsal and lateral constriction behind thorax. Cremaster with the subdorsal ridges more clearly defined than in <i>amata.</i> Colour pinkish-bone, with a dark dorsal line and some dark marks on the dorso-lateral legion of abdomen as well as at the apices of wing-veins. <b>Fraser</b> (1911) notes that the pupa is ``identical with that of <i>protractus</i>, usually flesh-coloured and without markings.''</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sind</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> and <span class="smallcaps">United</span> <span class="smallcaps">Provinces</span>, extending to the Persian Gulf; not rare. According to <b>Fraser</b> (1911) the butterfly is common in Sind all the year round.</p>

<p><b>colotis fausta</b> (Olivier). (Fig. 160)</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> pale to deep salmon-buff. Fore wing with a black discocellular spot which is not connected with a dark costal border; a broad black distal border, narrowing posteriorly to a point at vein 2 or the tornus, and enclosing spots of the ground-colour; a series of small marginal spots. Hind wing with or without marginal black spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with an oval patch of modified scales, placed in the proximal area above vein 1; this brand is more or less prominent on the upperside as a small raised spot.</p>

<p>{\female}. Dimorphic. one form resembling the {\male}, but without the sex-patch. Hind wing costal area on upperside not paler than the rest of the wing. The second form is white or partly white and partly salmon-buff.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Bottle-shaped, with 18 longitudinal ridges meeting in a thickened ring round the top. White at first, but soon turning yellowish, with three red irregular bands.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Rich green; sometimes a yellow narrow dorsal band, continued to the vertex; usually three large patches, light pinkish-brown with darker margins, in the spiracular region of segments 2, 8, and 11; sometimes there are eleven patches, which form a chain from segments 2 to 12. Lenght, 25 mm.; breadth, 4 mm.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;The longitudinal axis of the body is quite straight from the tip of the short, conical snout to the end of segment 13. The cremaster is as long as segment 13, and is trapeze-shaped, narrowing backwards, the hind margin or extremity being very distinctly concave. Usually livid bone-colour; a black dot laterally near the front margin of each segment, and sometimes a larger dorsal one near the hind margin of segments 8 and 9; the pupa is sometimes light green with the lateral line faintly yellow. Length, 19 mm.; breadth, 5 mm. at the broadest part.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Palestine to Arabia, Somaliland Persia, <span class="smallcaps">Western</span>
<span class="smallcaps">India</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Ceylon.</span> Three subspecies, of which two are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>156 <i>a</i> <b>colotis fausta fausta</b> (Olivier)</p>

<p><i>Papilio fausta</i>, Olivier, 1801, pl. xxxiii, figs. 4 <i>a</i>, 4 <i>b</i> ({\female}, Asia Minor).</p>

<p><i>Idmais fausta</i>, Butler, 1880 <i>a</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 409 (Kandahar); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 508 (Sind, Baluchistan, S. Afghanistan); id., 1887, p. 275 (Karachi); Marshall, 1897, p. 8; Butler, 1897 <i>b</i>, p. 498; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 56, t. 23 <i>c</i>; Verity, 1908, p. 197, pl. xxxix, figs. 9 ({\male}), 10, 11 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Colotis fausta</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 266 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus fausta fausta</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174.</p>

<p><i>Colotis fausta fausta</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83; id., 1932 <i>b</i> p. 200 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 72, pl. vii, fig. 49 ({\male}).</p>

<p>In this, the nominotypical form, the black marginal border of the fore wing does not reach the tornus. {\female} resembles the {\male}.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> pale salmon-buff, paler in specimens from desert areas, darker in those occurring in regions where there is a regular though not heavy rainfall. Fore wing with basal and costal areas more or less dusted with black; an oval annular discocellular spot of variable size; a broad black apical area bearing a macular band of the ground-colour, usually posteriorly merged with the ground-colour;this macular band varies in width, being wider in specimens from desert sreas; similarly the marginal spots of ground-colour are either large or small. Hind wing with marginal black vein-spots; costa broadly pale, fading to white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pale yellowish-white, in many specimens from moist localities suffused with a beautiful rosy flush; the markings in such specimens prominent, in those from dry localities more or less obsolescent. Fore wing with discocellular spot not annular; in some specimens a post-discal, dark ochraceous-brown, narrow, curved band from costa to middle of area 2. Hind wing with a small discocellular spot in the form of an oval light brown ring, always much smaller than the spot on the fore wing; a post-discal, curved, more or less sinuate band similar to and in continuation of the band on the fore wing, from the costa to vein 1 <i>b.</i> Antenn{\ae} head, thorax, and abdomen dusky black, the antennal club on underside, the hairs that cover the head and thorax, and the scaling of the abdomen salmon-buff; underside much paler, fading to white in specimens from dry localities.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, with similar but very much broader markings. Fore wing with basal and costal areas heavily dusted with greyish-blue. Hind wing with marginal vein-spots large and quadrate, often united into a continuous band enclosing and quadrate, often united into a continuous band enclosing small marginal spots of ground-colour. Sometimes there is a trace of a post-discal macular black band, and more rarely is this band prominent and complete.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white; markings as in the {\male}, but broader, darker, and more prominent.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> and N.W <span class="smallcaps">Frantier</span> <span class="smallcaps">Provinces</span> (Tochi Valley), extending west to Turkey, Egypt, and South Arabia; not rare.</p>

<p>156 <i>b.</i> <b>Colotis fausta faustina</b> (C. &amp; R. Felder).</p>

<p><i>Idmais faustina</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 190.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus oriens</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 134, pl. vii, fig. 7 ({\female}) (Kalka).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus fausta</i>, Watson, 1894, pp. 517, 525; Nurse, 1899, p. 513.</p>

<p><i>Colotis fausta</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 266 (part.); Fraser, 1911, p. 867 (Sind); Bell, 1914, p. 80 (early stages).</p>

<p><i>Madais fausta</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 153, pl. 600, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female} wet form), 1 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form), 1 <i>e</i> (albino {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Colotis fausta faustina</i> {\female} f. <i>{\ae}sypera</i> Talbot, 1939 (Jan.), Trans. R. Ent. Soc. Lond. vol. lxxxviii, pt. 7, p. 215 (Deesa).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female} A darker race than the nominotypical one. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the costa more dusted with grey-black; the submarginal salmon-coloured spots are smaller, and usually have some grey dusting on their outer edges. {\female} with the outer dark border of hind wing more developed than in the nominotypical race.</p>

<p>{\female} <b>{\ae}sypera</b> Talbot.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> white, often more or less irregularly suffused on parts of the wing with salmon-buff; fore wing dusted with black over the basal fourth. <i>Type</i> from Deesa, August 1897 (ex Coll. Nurse); in the British Museum.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Punjab</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sind</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Karwar.</span></p> 

<p>156 <i>c.</i> <b>Colotis fausta fulvia</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 161, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Idmais fulvia</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 392, pl. ix, fig. 5 ({\male}{\female}) (S. India).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus fulvia</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 143 (Poona); Aitken 1887, p. 40; Watson, 1894, pp. 518, 525.</p>

<p><i>Madais fulvia</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 154, pl. 601, figs. 2, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus fausta fulvia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174; Yates, 1931,</p>

<p><i>Colotis fausta fulvia</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83, pl. ix, fig. B 18.4 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Idmais tripuncta</i>, Butler, 1868, p. 221, pl. xvii, fig. 9 ({\male}); Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 130, pl. xlix, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}); Manders, 1904 <i>a</i>, p. 79 (Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Colotis fausta tripuncta</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 267.</p>

<p><i>Idmais tripunctatus</i>, Butler, 1880 <i>a</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 149, pl. xv, fig. 4 ({\female}) (Nilgiris) (nim. nov.).</p>

<p><i>teracolus tripunctata</i>, Aitken, 1887, p. 40; Watson, 1894, pp. 518, 525.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus rosaceus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 134 pl. vii, fig. 6 ({\male}) (Akote).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus solaris</i>, Butler 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 135 ({\male}, Sind); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i>, p. 437, pl. xxxix, fig 5 ({\female} Deesa).</p>

<p><i>Idmais surya</i>, Moore, 1884, p. 45 ({\male}, Orissa).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus palliseri</i>, Butler, 1888 <i>b</i>, p. 418 (Khandesh); Watson, 1894, pp. 518, 525.</p>

<p><i>Colotis fulvia</i> f. <i>palliseri</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 154, pl. 601, figs. 2 <i>c</i>, <i>e</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>d</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus fausta</i> f. <i>palliseri</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174.</p>

<p>This subspecies is distinguished by the fore wing upperside having the marginal black area extended to the tornus. {\female} whitr.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour almost orange-yellow. Fore wing with costa heavily dusted with black; discocellular spot large, not annular; apical and marginal area black, enclosing not more than three moderately large subapical spots and a series of minute marginal specks of the ground-colour. Hind wing with the marginal black spots rather large.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> more richly yellow than in the nominotypical form; fore wing markings dusky black, those on hind wing rose-pink.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> white Fore wing with basal and costal areas heavily dusted with greyish-blue; marginal border broad, and with three subapical spots as in the {\male}. Hind wing with black marginal border and white marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, sometimes with faint yellow suffusion; apical and marginal areas anteriorly light to dark ochraceous-yellow; discocellular spot very large; a broad post-discal, macular, dark reddish-brown band. Hind wing pale ochraceous-yellow, sparsely powdered with black; post-discal macular reddish-brown band as broad as the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 45-55 mm.</p>

<p>The dry-season form is <b>rosaceus</b> (Butl.), of which <i>palliseri</i> Butl. is a synonym.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914).&#x2014;The eggs are laid separately, generally on an old leaf, sometimes on a dry twig or leaf-scar. The food-plant is <i>M{\ae}rua arenaria</i> Hook. f. &amp; Thoms., family Capparidace{\ae}, a climbing shrub confined to places where the vegetation is comparatively scanty, and to more or less desert localities.</p>
 
<p>The males fly fast, generally near the ground. They frequent flowers among the grass, as also do the females, which are less commonly seen. A sun-loving butterfly, characteristic of the plains and desert regions.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> (northern part) and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">Inaia;</span> not rare. Between Bombay and Kanara <i>fulvia</i> overlaps the range of <i>faustina.</i></p>

<p><b>Colotis etrida</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p>A Indian species occurring in two races. To be recognized by its white ground-colour, the fore wing bearing an apical orange patch which is edged with black on the inner side.</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Longer than broad, the apical third conical; eight longitudinal ridges, which are transversely striate. Surface shiny, at first yellowish and changing to reddish, caused by profuse blotching.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Resembles that of <i>Eurema hecabe</i> (Linn.), but the anal segment ends in two short and obscure knobs. A broad white spiracular band touched with orange above each spiracle, and bordered below by a slightly less broad pur-chocolate band; venter green. Length 19 mm.; breadth, 3 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Also of the type of <i>Eurema hecabe</i> (Linn.). Snout slightly upturned, and cremastral extremity distinctly bifid. Ground-colour pinkish-bone; a prominent green-sepia band above the spiracular line from segments 6 and 7 to 13; a similarly coloured dorsal band from the head to the same segment; abdomen streaked with three similar light-coloured lateral bands. When the pupa is more strongly developed. Length, 18 mm.; breadth, 3.5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular<span class="smallcaps">India</span> </span>  to the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan.</span> </p>
 
 <p>157 <i>a</i>, <b>Colotis etrida etrida</b> (Boisduval).</p>
 
 <p><i>Anthocharis etrida</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 576 (S. India); Lang 1864, p. 103 (Lucknow).</p>
 
 <p><i>Callosune etrida</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 69; Wallace, 1867, p. 390 (Punjab); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 132, pl. 594, figs. 1 <i>f</i>, <i>g</i>, <i>h</i>, <i>i</i>, <i>l</i>, <i>m</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus etrida</i>, Butler, 1870 <i>b</i>, p. 726 (Murree); id., 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 160 (Sind, Masuri, Kanara); id., 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 609 (Karachi); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 510 (Karachi); id., 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 144 (S. India); Aitken, 1887, p. 38; Hampson, 1889, p. 362; Davidson &amp; Aitken 1890, p. 359; Watson, 1894, pp. 522. 526; Marshall, 1897, p. 591 (Mussooree); Sharpe, 1898, p. 104, pl. xxxiii, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>m</i> ({\male}{\female}); Nurse, 1899, p. 513.</p>
 
 <p><i>Colotis etrida</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 270; Bell, 1909, pl. ii, figs. 20, 20 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, pp. 385, 426 (Palni Hills); Fraser, 1911, p. 867 (Sind); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1914, p. 89, pl. J, fig. 67, 67 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}) (early stages); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus etrida etrida</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174, t. 73 <i>b.</i></p>
 
 <p><i>Colotis etrida trida</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83, pl. ix, fig. B 18.5 ({\male}); id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 200 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 73, pl. vii, fig. 50 ({\female}).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus pernotatus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 159, pl. vii. fig. 1 ({\male}{\female}, Punjab); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 132, pl. 594, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female})b (wet form).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus farrinus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 159, pl. vii, fig. 2 ({\male}{\female}, N.W. Himalaya); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 132, pl. 594, figs. 1 <i>d</i>, <i>e</i> ({\male}{\female}) (interm. f.).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus purus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 160, pl. vii, fig. 2 ({\male}{\female}, Punjab); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 132.</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus strida</i> f. <i>ourus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174, <i>t.</i> 73 <i>b.</i> figs. 3, 4 (imago).</p>
 
 <p><i>Treacolus bimbura</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 161, pl. vii, figs. 3, 4 (imago) (Cashmere); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 132, pl. 594, figs. I, J, K ({\male}{\female}) (winter form).</p>
 
 <p><i>Teracolus casimirus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 161, pl. vii, fig. 5 ({\male}, Kashmir).</p>
 
 <p><i>Upperside</i> white, the base of both wings sparsely dusted with black. Fore wing with a small black discicellular spot; apical area broadly black, bearing an oval, curved, rich orange patch placed obliquely and traversed by the veins, which are black; inner edge of black area diffuse. Hind wing are black; inner edge of black area diffuse. Hind wing with a subapical short diffuse black streak from the costa, sometimes absent, and a series of marginal black spots that in specimens from moist localities are very large</p>
 
 <p><i>Underside</i> white. Fore wing with cell and apical area suffused with sulphur-yellow; the orange patch shows through, its inner edge margined anteriorly by a very obscure oblique fuscous band. Hind wing with the subapical streak obscurely indicated.</p>
 
 <p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of  fore wing with orange patch narrower; a small black spot in middle of area 1 <i>b</i>, and another in 3. Hind wing with marginal spots slightly larger.</p>
 
 <p><i>Underside</i> with apex of fore wing and whole surface of hind wing suffused lightly, or in specimens from very dry localities heavily, with ochraceous. Fore wing with spots in areas 1 <i>b</i> and 3 as on upperside. Hind wing with a discal, curved, almost complete series of fuscous spots; otherwise, as in the {\male}. In both sexes the antenn{\ae} vary from white to pale brownish; head thorax, and abdomen black, head and thorax with short greyish-brown hairs; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>
 
 <p>The name <b>casimirus</b> (Butl.) (=<i>bimbura</i> Butl.) refers to specimens from dry localities, in which the orange patch is paler and the black markings obsolescent. On the <i>underside</i> the hind wing and apical area of fore wing are more or less ochraceous.</p>
 
 <p><i>Habits</i> (From <i>Bell</i>, 1914).&amp;The eggs are laid singly. Pupation nearly always on the underside of a leaf near the ground, so that the chrysalis is exposed to the soil or a dead leaf or other light object, and this probably accounts for the majority of those found being bone-coloured instead of green. The larva feeds upon capers, and has been bred most commonly upon <i>Cadaba indica</i> Lam.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan;</span> common.</p>

<p>157 <i>b.</i> <b>colotis etrida limbatus</b> (Butler)</p>

<p><i>Tercolus limbatus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 161 ({\male}, Ceylon); id., 1897, p. 456; Watson, 1894, pp. 522, 526; Sharpe, 1898, p. 110, pl. xxxiv, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-g</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p> 

<p><i>Callosune limbata</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 129, pl. xlix, fig. 5 ({\male}); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 135, pl. 595, figs. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Colotis etrida limbata</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 270; Ormiston, 1924, p. 93; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83; Peile, 1937, p. 73.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus etrida limbata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Distinguished from the nominotypical form as follows:&#x2014; <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing wing with apical area darker and broader, occupying about a third of that the wing; the orange patch proportionately narrower, so that the black on its inner margin has the appearance of being broader; this inner edge of the orange area is often bordered by a suffusion of sulphur-yellow, and sometimes is extended inwards in area 3. Hind wing with marginal black spots united to form a continuous band. Occasional specimens occur with the hind wing border as in the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Expanse: {\male}{\female}, 25-45 mm.</i></p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon;</span> common.</p>

<p>158. <b>Colotis eucharis</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 162, egg).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eucharis</i>, Fabricius, 1775, p. 472.</p>

<p><i>Callosune eucharis</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 68; id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 128, pl. xlix, fig. 4 ({\male}); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 129, pl. 593, figs. 1 <i>e</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>f</i>, <i>h</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus eucharis</i>, Burler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 164; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 144 (Bombay); Hampson, 1889, p. 362; Watson, 1894, pp. 522, 526; Marshall, 1897, p. 26; Butler, 1897 <i>b</i>, p. 455; Nic{\'e}ville, 1899 <i>c</i>, p. 214; Sharpe, 1900, p. 97, pl. xxxi, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>m</i> ({\male}{\female}); Manders, 1904 <i>a</i>, p. 79 (Ceylon); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174, <i>t.</i> 73 <i>b.</i></p>

<p><i>Colotis eucharis</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 268; Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 386 (Palni Hills); Bell, 1914, p. 86, pl. ii, figs. 20 (larva), 20 <i>a</i> (pupa) (early stages); Ormiston, 1924, p. 94 (Ceylon); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83; Peile, 1937, p. 73.</p>

<p><i>Papilio aurora</i>, Cramer, 1780, p. 18, pl.ccxix, figs. A, B (Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Pieris titea</i>, Godart, 1819, p. 124 (Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus titea</i>, Watson, 1894, pp. 522, 526.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus pseudevanthe</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 164, pl. vii, fig. 16 ({\male}{\female}, Bombay); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 129, pl. 593, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i>, 1 <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\male} albino) (wet form).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus pallens</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>b</i>, p. 49 (Bombay; North Kanara); Watson, 1894, p. 523; Swinhoe, 1909, pp. 129, 131, pl. 593, figs, 1 <i>i</i>, <i>j</i>, <i>k</i>, <i>l</i> ({\male}{\female}) (extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Tercolus eucharis</i> f. <i>pallens,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174.</p>

<p>This is very probably conspecific with two African forms.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> pure white. Fore wing with base and costa for a short distance generally sparsely dusted with black; a broad apical orange-yellow patch, with its inner edge straight and margined with gamboge-yellow; this patch is sometimes immaculate, but generally bears a black diffuse spot on its lower inner edge which may or may not extend to the outer margin below the orange; costa and outer margin bordered with black, which is much reduced in specimens from dry areas. Hind wing with marginal black costal spot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> usually pure white, suffused except on disc of fore wing, with pinkish-yellow, and at base of same wing with pure sulphur-yellow; the orange patch and marginal black show through from the upperside, the former crossed by a sinuous fuscous band that ends in a black diffuse spot. Hind wing shaded with ochraceous at the base, and with a subapical fuscous costal spot, also a few scattered transverse fuscous stri{\ae} and small spots. Many specimens have the subapical spot continued as an obscure fuscous band across the wing, and bear a series of large marginal fuscous spots. Both wings with black discocellular dots. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; antenn{\ae} speckled with white on the  sides, bead and thorax clothed with short greyish-brown hairs; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with base and costa more heavily dusted with black; discocellular spot larger than in the {\male}; apical area black, with three enclosed elongate orange spots; inner edge of black area irregularly sinuate and diffuse, extended shortly inwards in area 3; a transverse black spot across the middle of area 1 <i>b.</i> Hind wing with sparse greyish-black basal dusting; subpical spot and marginal spots much larger than in the {\male;} sometimes there is an obscure transverse posterior discal band.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with markings much broader and more prominent than in the {\male;} the fuscous stri{\ae} and dots more numerous.</p>

<p>The dry-season form <b>aurora</b> (Cram.) (=<i>pallens</i> Moore) has reduced black markings, and the hind wing underside is rose-red.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 40-45 mm.</p>

<p>In the British Museum are 2 {\male}{\male}, probably of the dry season, in which the orange apical area is absent. They are creamy white instead of chalky-white; hind wing underside immaculate. (Bombay, 1887, January and November) (ex Coll. Swinhoe).</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Shape almost like a bell-jar, with 17 longitudinal ribs, some of which form a crown of teeth round the top; each rib is cross-rayed many times, producing a beaded appearance. Orange, with subcutaneous dull blotches.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>The tubercles of the body are comparatively large and conspicuous as compared with <i>C. dana.</i> Dark green to yellowish-green, with a light dorsal band generally present, body obscurely darker spotted; in some individuals there is a large, more or less triangular pinkish-brown white patch, including the spiracles of segments 6 to 8, the anterior one generally the smallest, increasing backwards, the largest never reaching the line of the dorso-lateral tubercles, and never extended posteriorly to farther than the centre of the segment. Length, 20 mm.; breadth, 3.5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Shape more like that of <i>Valeria</i> than other <i>Colotis</i> species. Snout conical and very rugose. Glaucous-green with a yellow shade, the whole surface vermiculate with little short, whitish lines; a yellow-white lateral wing-line from the shoulders, continued along abdomen to cremaster. The colour may be darker green or light yellowish-brown, marbled and blotched with white and darker brown. Length, 17 mm.; breadth, 4 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly often on a dead thorn or twig. The larv{\ae} turn pink before pupation, and are much subject to the attacks of parasites, over 50 per cent. dying from this cause. The food-plant is usually <i>Cadaba indica</i> Lam., a shrub common in waste places and hedges in the Deccan. The butterfly emerges in about a week.</p>

<p>The butterfly emerges in about a week.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a weak flier, keeping near the ground, and generally found in numbers near the food-plant to the flowers of which it is attracted. The male rests frequently on the ground, and likes the sun. The female is not often seen.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Central</span> <span class="smallcaps">India;</span> common.</p>

<p><b>Colotis dan{\ae}</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p>This species resembles <i>etrida</i> (Boisd.), from which it can be distinguished by the apical patch of the fore wing being crimson, and in the {\female} this patch is traversed by a dark macular band.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Resembles in appearance a small <i>Hebomoia.</i> Usually glaucous-green, with many indistinct whitish spots or short lines; a broad spiracular white line, which may be bordered above by plum-colour or brown-orange. Length, 20 mm.; breadth, 3.5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Stout, with a short, thickly conical head process, a prominent ventral wing-bulge, and thorax moderately humped. Green or bone-colour, with slight marblings and transverse lines, which in the green form may be absent.</p>

<p>Length, 15-16 mm.; breadth, 4.5 mm. at the shoulders.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">Sind</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> and Persia; extending to Africa south of the Sahara. Two subspecies in the Indian area</p>

<p>159 <i>a</i> <b>Colotis dan{\ae} dan{\ae}</b> (Fabricius). (Pl. II, figs. 11, larva, 12, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio dan{\ae}</i>, Fabricius, 1775, p. 476; Donovan, 1800, pl. xxvi, fig. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Callosunc dan{\ae}</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 69; id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 129; Wallace, 1867, p. 389; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 136, pl. 595, figs. 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 3 ({\male}), 3 <i>a</i> ({\female}), 4, 4 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 4 <i>a</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}) (extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus dan{\ae}</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 157; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 143, (S. India); Aitken, 1887, p. 38 (B. India); Watson, 1894, pp. 521, 526; Butler, 1897 <i>b</i>, p. 498.</p>

<p><i>Colotis dana\dd{e}</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 271, pl. xvi, fig. 107 ({\male}); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i> p. 386 (Palni Hills); Ormiston, 1924, p. 95 (Ceylon); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coog).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus dana\dd{e}</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174, t. 73 <i>b</i> (imago).</p>

<p><i>Colotis dan{\ae} dan\{ae}</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83, pl. ix, fig. B 18.7 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 74, pl. v, fig. 31 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus sanguinalis</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 158 (Ceylon): Watson. 1894, pp. 521, 526.</p>

<p><i>Callosune sanguinalis</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 129.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus dana\dd{e}</i> f. <i>sanguinalis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174 (intermed. form).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus taplini</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i> p. 444, pl. xl, figs. 8, 9 ({\male}{\female} Bombay); Watson, 1984, pp. 522, 526.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus dana\dd{a}</i> f. <i>taplini</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174 (dry form).</p>

<p>This subspecies is very variable, especically in the {female.}</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white, the base of wings dusted with black. to a variable extent, and sometimes not at all. Fore wing with or without a minute discocellular black spot; apical area broadly carmine, edged proximally and distally with black, both edges meeting on the costa and outer margin, and sometimes extending as a black line to the tornus. Hind wing with marginal black spots, varying in size and sometimes reduced to more or less obsolescent, unconnected dots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white. Fore wiing with base of cell washed with sulphur-yellow; discicellular spot as on upperside; an ochraceous-pink apical patch, not margined with black, but similar in shape and position to the patch on the upperside, and sometimes more or less suffused with greyish; this patch is crossed near its inner edge by an obliquely placed series of four or five spots that vary in colour from pale ferruginous to black, in some specimens there are two marginal diffuse black spots, one each at the ends of veins 2 and 3. Hind wing sometimes pure white, but usually suffused with ochraceous-pink to a greater or less extent; a small discocellular spot, pale ferruginous to black, sometimes annular and centred with carmine; a discal, curved, macular band, varying from pale ferruginous to black, the posterior spots often obsolescent or entirely absent; a series of marginal black vein-dots which are sometimes connected by a fine marginal line. Antenn{\ae} pale brown, speckled with white; head, thorax, and abdomen black; head and thorax anteriorly clothed with brown, sometimes greyish-black hairs; underside of palpi thorax, and abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> white, the base of wings more or less heavily dusted with greyish-black, sometimes extended as a broad band parallel to the inner margin of the hind wing. Fore wing with carmine patch smaller than in the {\male}, sometimes reduced to a row of pale, rosy, subapical streaks, but always bordered distally, and generally proximally also, by black of varying width; sometimes the inner black border is very narrow, in others broad, and in a very few entirely absent; discocellular spot larger than in the {\male}, a post-discal, anterior, macular, curved black band, the upper spots of which cross the carmine area, or where this is reduced it crosses the black proximal edging; a black, transverse, somewhat diffuse spot in area 1 <i>b</i> and 2. Hind wing with a dusky discocellular spot; a discal, black, macular, curved band, more or less incomplete; marginal black spots, sometimes connected to form a continuous band. All these markings are generally diffuse.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing white, suffused with sulphur-yellow at base of cell and with an ochraceous, sometimes with a greyish or reddish, tinge over the apical area; discocellular spot, post-discal band, and spots in areas 1<i>b</i> and 2 as on upperside but more clearly defined, the spots that compose white, suffused to a greater or less degree with ochraceous, sometimes pink; discocellular spot and discal band as on upperside, but more clearly defined, annular, and generally centred with carmine; marginal black specks which may or may not be connected by a fine marginal line.</p>

<p><i><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 40-50 mm.</i></p>

<p>The name <b>taplini</b> (Swinhoe) refers to an extreme dry-season form with much reduced black marking, and the <i>underside</i> with apical area of fore wing and entire hind wing reddish-ochraceous. An intermediate form is <i>sanguinalis</i> (Butler), and this name should be applied to the dry-season form as a whole.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914).&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly on an old leaf or its stalk. Larva turns pink before pupating. it is much subject to the attacks of parasites, and the pupa is attacked by flies. The pupal stage lasts about a week.  The food-plants are capers, and the butterfly has been bred on <i>Cadaba indica</i> Lam., <i>Capparis sepiaria</i> Linn., and <i>C. divaricata</i> Lam., also on <i>M\{ae}rua arenaria</i> Hook. f. &amp; Thoms.</p>

<p>With the exception of the male of <i>C. fausta</i> (Oilv.) the butterfly flies straighter than other Indian species of the genus. It keeps to the ground, and is never found in the jungles and regions of heavy rainfall. Both sexes are found in about equal numbers.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India;</span> not rare. According to Evans (1910) the butterfly is common in the Palni Hills from April to June and August to October.</p>

<p>159 <i>b.</i> <b>Colotis dan{\ae} dulcis (Butler).</b></p>

<p><i>Teracolus dulcis</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 157, pl. vii, fing 13 ({\male}{\female}, Kattywur); id., 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 610 (W. India); Swinhoe, 1884 <b>b</b>, p. 509 (Karachi); id., 1887, p. 277; Watson, 1894, pp. 521, 526.</p>

<p><i>Callosune dulcis</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 138, pl. 596, figs. 14 <i>i</i>, <i>j</i> ({\male}), 14 <i>k</i>, <i>l</i> ({\female}) (dry season).</p>

<p><i>Colotis dan{\ae} dulcis</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 200 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 74.</p>

<p><i>Teracolus dirus</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>, p. 157, pl. vii, fig. 11 ({\female}, Sind);' id., 1880 <i>b</i>, p. 222 (Karachi); id., 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 610 (Karachi).</p>

<p><i>Callosune dirus</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 138, pl. 596, figs. 1 <i>d</i>, 1 <i>f</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i> ({\female}) (intermed. from).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus eboreides</i>, Butler, 1876 <i>b</i>,. p. 158, pl. vii, fig. 12 (imago).</p>

<p><i> Callosune eboreides</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 138, pl. 596, figs. 1, 1 <b>b</b> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus subroseus</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i>, p. 443, pl. xl, fings. 6, 7 ({\male}{\female} Karachi); Watson, 1894, pp. 521, 526.</p>

<p><i>Callosune subroseus</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 140, pl. 597, figs. 1 <i>d</i>, <i>f</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i>, <i>g</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus dana\dd{e}</i> f. <i>subroseus</i>, Frauhstorfer, 1910, p. 174 (dryform).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus immaculatus</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>a</i>, p. 443; id., 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 510 (Karachi); Watson, 1894, pp. 521, 526.</p>

<p><i>Callosune immaculatus</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 139, pl. 596, fig. 1 <i>g</i> (imago).</p>

<p><i>Callosune alberta</i>, Swinhoe 1890, p. 356 (Karachi); id., 1909, p. 140, pl. 597, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>h</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, <i>c</i>, <i>i</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Colotis dan{\ae}</i>, Fraser (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1911, p. 867 (Sind).</p>

<p><i>{\male}{\female}</i> A slightly differentiated race, even more variable than the preceding one, and with markings more characteristic of the dry season.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> with narrow black inner edging to the crimson tip, and with the black border of the hind wing formed of separate spots.</p>

<p>In the dry-season form <b>subroseus</b> (Swinh.), of which <i>alberta</i> (Swinh.) is a synonym, the hind wing <i>underside</i> is sandy rose colour, the dark spots with red centres. The name <b>dirus</b> (Butl.) applies to a {\female} form which has a narrow subapical band, usually of short stripes, pinkish-white or red. </p>

<p>The name <b>immaculatus</b> (Swinh.) refers to a {\male} form in which the hind wing <i>underside</i> is scarcely marked.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kathiawar</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan;</span> not rare.</p>

<p>160. <b>Colotis liagore</b> (Klug).</p>

<p><i>Pontia liagore</i>, Klug, 1929, <i>t.</i> vi, figs. 5, 6 ({\male}, Ambukohl).</p>

<p><i>Teracolus liagore</i>, Aurivillius, 1910, p. 59, <i>t.</i> 19 <i>a</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p>A peculiar and uncommon species which hitherto was recorded only from Africa. It may be mistaken for a small specimen of <i>eucharis</i> (Fabr.), but the apical area of the fore wing upperside is orange, not orange-yellow, and on the underside of this srea there is an orange subapical band.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with broad apical orange area reaching to vein 2 at the margin; this area is edged along its outer and costal borders by a black line that is very slightly produced to shirt streaks at the veins, and is usually thickened at about middle of the costa and at vein 2; the inner edge of the orange area is without black scaling, and is evenly defined; there is no discocellular dot. Hind wing usually with small triangular black marginal spots on the veins, but these are not constantly present; basal area more or less dusted with black; no discocellular dot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white. Fore wing with a subapical orange band, which is sometimes not very distinct, formed of short bars in areas 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8; apical area pale yellow or buff, extending slightly proximad of the orange band, and occupying the same area as on the upperside; some slight basal black scaling. Hind wing white, yellowish or pinkkish, without markings except for the costal edge, which is yellow or orange along the basal fourth or more, and for some slight black dusting over the proximal area</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing without a black marginal line, but with short marginal vein-streaks more distinct than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with a slight black discocellular mark, and sometimes a small spot of sparse black scaling in the post discal area below vein 2. In other respects similar to the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 33-38 mm.</p>

<p><i>Disribution/</i>&#x2014;Northern Nigeria to Senegal, and the Egyptian Sudan to Muscat and South Arabia.</p>

<p>A single {\male} in the British Museum from <span class="smallcaps">South</span> <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan,</span> taken at Pasni, 9. iv. 1935, and presented by the Imperial Institute of Entomology.</p>

<p>The {\female} appears to be very rare, as only two example, with <b>23</b> {\male}{\female}, are in the British Museum.</p>

<p>Genus <b>HEBOMOIA</b> H\dd{u}bner. (Fig. 163).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 95; Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, pp. 37, 48 (type, <i>glaucippe</i> (Linn.)); id., 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(c)</i>, pp. 289-93 (revision); Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>b</i>, pp. 89-109 (revision); Bingham, 1907, p. 273, fig. 70 (venation); Swinhoe, 1909. p. 122; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 174; Klots, 1931, p. 174 (type, <i>glaucippe</i> (Linn.); Dixey, 1932, p. 59, figs. 61-9 (plume-scales); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 83.</p>


<p><i>I phias</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 595.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>H. glaucippe</i> (Linn.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing triangular; costa arched; apex more or less acute; outer margin oblique, slightly sinuate; tornus well marked, obtuse; inner margin bisinuate; cell slightly more than half lenght of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell, close together, running almost parallel for most of their length; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the cell, forming a short <i>udc; mdc</i> about half the length of <i>idc</i>, which is angled. Hind wing suboval, broad; apex and tornal angle boldly rounded; precostal vein long, bent sharply distad. Antenn{\ae} not more than half the length of fore wing, club gradual; eyes naked, prominent; palpi somewhat flattened, scaly, clothed with stiff hairs anteriorly and at the apex, third segment short and oval; thorax and abdomen robust; legs slender.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (from <i>Klots</i>, 1931).&#x2014;Penis without a basal prong; saccus slender, about as long as tegumen; uncus short, curved, bifurcate; a well chitinized area immediately beneath base of uncus and above anus; juxta well developed, hollowed out; valve with a dorsal and a distal process; harpe of medium size, with a dorsal point.</p>

<p>The <i>Hebomoia</i> are the largest Pierids found in the Oriental Region. The males usually fly in the morning, frequenting the edges of paths and woods and open thickets, coming also to <i>Lantana</i> flowers; during the hotter hours they settle on moist sand. The females are sluggish and remain in the thickets.</p>

<p>The species of this genus like those of <i>Ixias</i> and <i>Colotis</i>, Possess a brightly coloured apical area on the fore wing upperside, whilst the underside of hind wing and apical area of fore wing possess a cryptic coloration. In <i>Hebomoia</i> these characters are more strongly developed than in the two other genera. When at rest the underside blends well with the surroundings, as the proximal area of the fore wing is covered by the hind wing, the margin of which adjoins the apical area of the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span> (except the North-West), <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Lslands</span>, north to South China and the Loo Choo Islands, south to the Moluccas. Only two speies known. One species with four subspecies occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Hebomoia glaucippe</b> (Linn{\ae}us)</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white or yellow, the latter colour only found on the hind wing in one Indian race. Fore wing with apical half black, bearing a large orange patch which usually enters the end of the cell; the extension of the black area proximally of the orange patch is variable, and is often absent in specimens from dry areas. Hind wing with a few anterior marginal black spots or sometimes a very narrow marginal black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with proximal area white; apical area mottled brown or reddish. Hind wing similar to apical area of fore wing; a prominent deep brown or blackish line from base to outer margin, passing through middle of cell.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to the {\male}. <i>upperside</i> of fore wing with smaller orange patch, the black spots on its distal part enlarged and often cutting off a series of submarginal orange spots; proximal area often yellowish, with black basal dusting. Hind wing with black dentate outer border and a postdiscal row of prominent black spots.</p>

<p><i>Key to Subspecies</i></p>

<p>1. Hind wing upperside with distal half suffused with pure sulphur-yellow</p>

<p>[p. 478. g. <i>roepstorfii</i> W. -M.,</p>

<p>Hind wing upperside entirely white......</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with inner black edging to the orange area represented as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<p>[p. 477.</p>

<p>a. Narrow or obsolete ..</p>

<p><i>g. australis</i> Butl.,</p>

<p>b. Broad. ..  ..</p>

<p><i>g. glaucippe</i> (Linn.),</p>

<p>[p. 476.</p>

<p>161 <i>a.</i> <b>Hebomoia glaucippe glaucippe</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p><i>Papilio glaucippe</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 469.</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe</i>, Moore 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 759 (Bengal); id., 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 837 (Houndaran); id., 1886, p. 49 (Elphinstone Island); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 431 (Tavoy); Bingham, 1907 p. 274; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(c)</i>, p. 290; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 123, pl. 591, figs 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe glaucippe</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 91; id., 1910, p. 175, <i>t.</i> 70 <i>a</i>, p. 84, pl. ix, fig. 19.1 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 74.</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe aturia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 176 (Singapore to Tenasserim).</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> Creamy-white. Fore wing with costa narrowly, the apex and outer margin to middle of area 1 <i>b</i>, black; an irregular, somewhat sinuous, black band extends obliquely from beyond the middle of costa across upper angle of cell, and meeting the marginal black in area 1 <i>b;</i> within the triangle thus formed is enclosed a rich orange-red patch that is traversed by the black veins and bears in areas 3 to 6 a post-discal series of black inwardly-elongate spots. Hind wing with more or less defined anterior marginal black spots; a conspicuous post-discal black spot in area 7, and sometimes smaller spots below this.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white; apical third of fore wing and entire hind wing mottled with more or less prominent brown strig{\ae} and spots. Fore wing with costa brown. Hind wing with a fine brown line from the base through the cell to the middle of outer margin. Antenn{\ae} dark brown; head and thorax anteriorly with reddish-brown pile; upperside of thorax greyish-blue, abdomen white with a bluish tinge; underside of head and thorax more or less brownish, of abdomen white.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to the {\male}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour with a slight greenish tinge. Fore wing with orange patch consisting of a series of broad stripes in areas 3 to 6 and 10, the outer apices of which are deeply incised by black; a distal row of hastate orange spots in areas 2 to 6. Hind wing with a postdiscal series of large triangular black spots; a marginal black border, strongly toothed at the veins, formed of a connected series of large triangular spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the {\male}, the strig{\ae} and spots more numerous; costa of fore wing and median line of hind wing prominently brown.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with slightly more falcate apex. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour purer white. Hind wing in {\male} with black markings obsolete, in {\female} with smaller spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> mottlings of brown strig{\ae} and spots more numberous and dense.</p>

<p>I can find no reason for preserving the name <i>aturia</i> Fruhst. <i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> common.</p>

<p>161 <i>b.</i> <b>Hebomoia glaucippe australis</b> Butler. (Fig. 164, egg; pl. II, figs. 9, larva, 10, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia australis</i>, Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(c)</i>, p. 290 (S. India); Manders, 1904 <i>a</i>, p. 79 (Ceylon); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 125, pl. 592, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe australis</i>, Bingham (part.), 1907, p. 275; Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 93; de Rh\'e-Philipe, 1908, p. 885 (Konkan); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 175; Ormiston, 1924, p. 99 (Ceylon); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a.</i> p. 83; Peile, 1937, p. 74.</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe</i>, Aitken (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1887, p. 38; Davidson, Bell &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i> p. 572; Evans 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 386 (Palini Hilla); Bell, 1914, p. 95, pl. J, figs. 66 ({\male}), 66 <i>a</i> ({\female}), pl. 1, figs. 19, 19 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa);</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe ceylonica</i> Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>c</i>, p. 4 (Ceylon): id., 1907 <i>b</i> p. 93; id., 1910, p. 175, <i>t.</i> 70 <i>a</i> (imago): Evans. 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 83; Peile, 1937, p. 74.</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 127, pl. xlix, figs 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, larva, pupa).</p>

<p>A slightly differentiated rade, distinguished by the reduced black markings on the upperside in both sexes.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the orange area on its inner side edged narrowly with black, or without any black edging (dry-season form); black distal spots smaller. Hind wing with prominent black costal spot, absent in dry-season specimens</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with dark brown mottling; in the dry-season form much paler and less strongly mottled with brown.</p>

<p>{\female}.<i>Upperside</i> with the black markings less extended than in the nominotypical {\female}, the inner black edging to the orange area more expecially reduced. Seasonal variation slight, but the dry-season form paler on the underside.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 80-100 mm.</p>

<p>The type of <i>australis</i> Butl. belongs to the dry-season form, and both sexes are labelled ``Trincomalee.''</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg</i> (fig. 164).&#x2014;Elongate, three times as long as broad; 11 or 12 longitudinal ribs, of which each alternate one forms a sharp tooth at the top of the egg. At first shining white with a pink shade, turning yellow later.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Body with the dorsal half-segments convex, the ventral ones flattened; anal segment projecting over the anal claspers, narrowed, truncate, with a slight indentation in the centre of extreme margin. Body glaucous-green, lighter in the spiracular region, with a beaded, white, subspiracular line from segment 13 to the head; the lower half of the beads on this line is orange except on segment 3, where it is blue; through each one of the transverse tubercles (eachrow of such reaching to the spiracular line on each side) runs a short, longitudinal, purple line. Length, 47 mm., breadth, at segment 3, nearly 8 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;The shape is that of <i>Catopsilia.</i> Head process conical at base, cylindrical anteriorly, slightly up-turned at tip, and very rugose. Cremaster narrow-triangular, bifid at end, extensor ridges rugose, strong and ventral. Ground-clour dark yellowish-green; dorsum and a lateral headband purple; a large dorsal spot on segments 4, 5, and 9. Length, 37.5 mm.; breadth, 9.4 mm. at the shoulders.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly on the upperside of a leaf, usually on an old one close to the ground. The newly-hatched larva eats the egg-shell. The larva pupates on the underside of a leaf well hidden near the ground or close to the stem. The food-plants are Capparidace{\ae}, the larva being commonly found on <i>Crat{\ae}va religiosa</i> Forst. f., also often upon the large climber <i>Capparis moonii</i> wight.</p>

<p>The butterfly has a very strong and powerful  flight. it is fond of the sun, often rests on the ground, goes to damp places, and comes freely to flowers. When at rest on the ground among leaves or rubbish the insect is quite invisible, the colour and pattern blending so well with the surroundings.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India;</span> common.</p>

<p>161 <i>c.</i> <b>Hebomoia glaucippe roepstorfii</b> Wood-Mason.</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia roepstorfii</i>, Wood-Mason, 1880, p. 134 ({\male}{\female}, South Andamans); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 251, pl. xvi, figs. 3-5 ({\male}{\female}); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 126, pl. 592, figs. 2 ({\male}), 2 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i> ({\female}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe roepstorfi</i> (sic), Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 93; id., 1910, p. 175, <i>t</i> 71 <i>a</i> (imago).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia roepstorfi</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 276, pl. xviii, fig. 122 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Hebomoia glaucippe roepstorfii</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 84.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Markings similar to those of <i>australis</i> Butl. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with sulphur-yellow suffusion along the inner margin of the orange patch and over the tornal area; the orange patch extends well into the end of the cell. Hind wing with distal half suffused with sulphur-yellow, and in the {\female} with more or less distinct orange stripes between the veins: {\female} with a series of small post-discal black spots placed on the orange stripes, which are more prominent above vein 3.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the preceding races.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> common.</p>

<p>Genus <b>VALERIA</b> Horsfield. (Fig. 165).</p>

<p><i>Valeria</i>, Horsfield, 1829 (June), p. 139 (type, <i>valeria</i> Cram.); Roepkem, 1935, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Pareronia</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 276, fig. 71 (venation) (type, <i>valeria</i> Cram.); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 174; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 177; Klots, 1931, p. 192 (type, <i>valeria</i> Cram.); Dixey, 1932, p. 59, figs. 71-84 (plume-scales); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 84.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>V valeria</i> (Cram.).</p>

<p><i>{\male}{\female}</i>. Fore wing with costa strongly arched; apex blunt; outer margin slightly sinuate, concave in the middle; tornus rounded; inner margin straight, about three-fourths length of costa; cell about half length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7, 8, 9 stalked; 6 from upper angle of cell; <i>mdc</i> more than half as long as <i>ldc.</i> Hind wing subtriangular; cell long, over half length of wing; discocellulars subequal and very oblique; precostal vein long, turned slightly distad. Antenn{\ae} much longer than half length of fore wing, club gradual, long and slender, palpi very short, third segment short, almost truncate at apex; eyes large, naked; thorax and abdomen particularly of <i>V avatar</i> (Moore), have a band of androconia over the apical and marginal black border of the hind wing upperside.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p>This genus is closely allied ti <i>Eronia</i> Butler, the species of which are found throughout Africa. The two genera are apparently connected by <i>V avatar</i> (Moore), which by pattern and genitalia approximates to <i>Eronia.</i></p>

<p>The males are bluish-white to bluish-green, with the veins blackened on both sides, more so on the upperside, where there is a tendency to the formation of a striped pattern. A distinctly striped pattern is found in the females, which are black, with stripes and spots of green, white, brownish or yellow. They resemble Danaines very strongly, not only in pattern but also in flight. The female may be monomorphic, dimorphic, or trimorphic, the pattern in each case resembling particular Danaines found in the same locality.</p>

<p>Larv{\ae} on Capparidace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span>, to Hainan,south and east to the Papuan region Seven species, of which three are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key to Males.</i></p>

<p>1. Upperside bluish-white, the veins not prominently darkened .. .. ..</p>

<p>[p. 481- <i>avatar</i> (Moore),</p>

<p>Upperside bluish-green, the veins strongly darkened .. . .. .... .</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Upperside of fore wing usually without submarginal spots. but when present the spots very small and not larger anteriorly.</p>

<p>[p. 483, <i>ceylanica</i> (Feld.),</p>

<p>Upperside of fore wing with prominent submarginal spots which increase in size anteriorly.</p>

<p><i>valeria</i> (Cram.), </p>

<p><i>Key to Females.</i></p>

<p>1. Fore wing upperside with the submarginal spots and outer ends of discal streaks in line. .</p>

<p>[p. 481. <i>avatar</i> (Moore),</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with the submarginal spot and discal streak  in area 3 shifted inwards..</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Upperside markings blush-green; hind wing submarginal spots small, the spot in area 7 larger. ... ...... ... ..</p>

<p>[p. 483. <i>ceylanica</i> (Feld.),</p>

<p>Upperside markings bluish-white or yellow; hind wing submarginal spots prominent.</p>

<p>[p. 485, <i>valeria</i> (Cram.),</p>

<p><b>Valeris avatar</b> (Moore).</p>

<p>The hind wing is entirely without androconia. <i>upperside</i> almost white, with a bluish tinge. Hind wing with a narrow outer black border which in dry-season specimens is reduced to a line. Both wings with the veins lightly blackened.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> markings white. Fore wing a regular row of five submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> darker than in the {\male}, with the veins more strongly darkened.</p>

<p><i>Disribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma,</span> Siam, and Annam. Two subspecies, both found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>162 <i>a.</i> <b>Valeria avatar avatar</b> (Moore). (Fig. 166, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Eronia avatar</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 61, pl. ii <i>a</i>, fig. 1 ({\male}, Sikkim); id., 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 760; Elwes, 1888, p. 419; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 311.</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia avatar</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1882, p. 64.</p>

<p><i>Pareronia avatar</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 277; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 174, pl. 606, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>d</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Parveronia avatar avatar</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910. p. 178, <i>t.</i> 66 <i>a</i> ({\male} {\female}, {\female} as <i>sumbawana</i>); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 84, pl. ix, fig. B 20.1 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 75.</p>

<p><i>Pareronia avatar avatara</i> f. <i>tarina</i> Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 178, <i>t.</i> 66 <i>a</i> ({\male}) (dry form).</p>

<p>{\male} <i>Upperside</i> very pale blue. Fore wing with the costal, apical and outer marginal areas black broad at the apex, the marginal black narrowing to the tornus, and strongly dentate on the veins; veins lightly blackened. Hind wing with the veins more or less lined with black; a narrow black marginal border.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pale silvery blue, the veins more or less brownish or black and conspicuous, the parts that are black on the upperside a much darker silvery blue. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen dusky brownish-black; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen very pale blue.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with blackish-brown ground-colour and white markings. Fore wing with three cell-stripes, the middle one broad, narrowing to a point near the base, and proximally dusted with the ground-colour; discal stripes in areas 1 <i>a</i> to 6, that in area 3 shorter than the others, and that in 6 reaching to the level of the submarginal spots; these latter spots somewhat rounded and placed near the edges of the discal stripes. Hind wing with the costa above the cell, the cell and inner margin below vein 1 <i>b</i> white; a thin dark cell-streak; vein 1 <i>a</i> lightly darkened; post-cellular white stripes in areas 1 <i>c</i> to 6; two long narrow ones in 1 <i>c</i>, short bars in 2 to 4, and two longer and narrower stripes in 5 and 6; submarginal spots in areas 5 and 6, and sometimes one in 4, more or less connected with the stripes next them.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> silvery white, the veins more prominently darkened than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 60-90 mm.</p>

<p>Fig. 166 is from a specimen from Sikkim, 3000 feet, June, in the British Museum.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>tarina</b> (Fruhst.).&#x2014;{\male}. Smaller than the wet form. <i>Upperside</i> with outer marginal black narrower.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> with the white stripes broader than in the wet form. Hind wing with submarginal spots more developed.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Northern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> rare.</p>

<p>162 <i>b.</i> <b>Valeria avatar paravatar</b> (Bingham).</p>

<p><i>Parernia avatar</i> var. <i>paravatar</i>, Bingham (de Nic\'eville, <i>in litt.</i>), 1907, p. 278 (hills of Middle and Southern Tenasserim).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia avatar paravatar</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 178, <i>t.</i> 66 <i>d</i> ({\female}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 84.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with broader apical and marginal black, which is more strongly produced on the veins. Hind wing with broader marginal black border than in the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 60-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Siam, and Annam; rare.</p>

<p><b>Valeria ceylanica</b> (Felder).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with bluish-green markings, the veins prominently black; outer black border on both wings broad, rarely marked with submarginal spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with bluish markings submarginal spots small, the spot in area 3 of fore wing shifted inwards.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>&#x2014;Valve not sharply narrowed to the apex, which is more or less obtuse; ventral projection and harpe placed more distad than in <i>valeria.</i></p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Resembles that of <i>V hippia</i> (Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Surface smooth, the usual tubercles hardly perceptible. Dark green, each tubercle a small brown spot, except the green subspiracular ones; a diagonal chequered brown band runs up and forwards from behind each spiracle on to the preceding segment; segments 5 and 12 with a large spiracular brown patch bearing two or three white spots. Length, 41 mm.; breadth, 6 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Head process long, sharp at extremity, up-curved; a very prominent ventral wing-bulge; cremaster parallel-sided, rather flattened, hind margin concave. Dull light green, somewhat glaucous, with some small brown, black, and yellow markings and spots. Length, 30 mm.; breadth, 6 mm. at the shoulders.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands.</span> Two subspecies.</p>

<p>163 <i>a</i> <b>Valeria ceyanica ceylanica</b> (C. &amp; R. Felder). (Pl. II,  figs. 17, larva, 18, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Eronia ceylanica</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 191 ({\male}, Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia ceylanica</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 138; Manders, 1904, p. 79.</p>

<p><i>Pareronia ceylanica</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 281; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 180, pl. 610, fig. 1 ({\male} type), 1<i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>d</i>, 1 <i>f</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i>, 1 <i>g</i> ({\female}) (dry form); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 386 (Palni Hills).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia pingasa ceylanica</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 179, <i>t.</i> 66 <i>e</i> (imago); Yates, 1931, p. 1007.</p>

<p><i>Parernia valeria ceylanica</i>, Ormiston,  1924, p. 100.</p>


<p><i>Pareronia ceylanica ceylanica</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p, 84; Peile, 1937, p. 75, pl. v, fig. 35 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Eronia pingasa</i>, Moore, 1872, p. 656 (Kanara).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia pingasa</i>, Butler, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 612 (Nilgiri Hills); Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Davidson &amp; Aitken 1890 <i>a</i>, p. 357; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 573, pl. vi, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa) (early stages, Kanara).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia pingasa</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 280, pl. xviii, fig. 124 ({\male}); Swinhoe, 1909, p. 177, pl. 608, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i>, ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>d</i>, 1 <i>f</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i>, 1 <i>g</i> ({\female}) (dry form), 1 <i>h</i> (larva), 1 <i>i</i> (pupa); Bell, 1914, p. 101, pl. 1, fig. 63 ({\male}) (early stages).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia pingasa pingasa</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 179, <i>t</i> 66 <i>e</i> (imago).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia compacta</i>, Butler, 1874 <i>b</i>, p. 235 (Center. India).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia fraterna</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 139, pl. liv, figs. 3 ({\male}), 3 <i>a</i> ({\female}); Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aiten, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 573 (Kanara).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia fraterna</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 181, pl. 611, figs. 1, 1 <i>b.</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>d</i>, 1 <i>f</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i>, 1 <i>g</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia pingasa ceylanica</i> f. <i>fraterna</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 179, t. 66 <i>d</i> (imago) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia pingasa ceylanica</i> f. <i>spiculifera</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 179 (intermed. form).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia ceylanica</i> f. <i>spiculifera</i>, Ormiston, 1924, p. 101.</p>

<p>Resemble <i>V hippia</i> (Fabr.) in colour and disposition of the markings, but differs as follows:&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour of a deeper blur. Fore wing with outer black border much broader generally, without submarginal spots, or only one or two present. Hind wing with outer black border very broad, narrowing slightly to the tornus.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in <i>hippia.</i></p>

<p>{\female}. Closely resembles the {\female} of <i>V hippia</i>, but on the <i>upperside</i> the outer black margins beyond the discal markings on both wings are proportionately much broader, the submarginal spots placed further from the margin.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with marginal black borders broader and darker, the submarginal spots on apex of fore wing and on hind wing absent or very indistinct and blurred. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen in both sexes much as in <i>V hippia.</i></p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 65-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>fraterna</b> (Moore).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with narrower black borders and less heavy vein-streaks.</p> 

<p><i>Underside</i> with the outer borders scarcely less darkened than the rest of the wing, and black markings on fore wing much smaller.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> markings broader and more bluish. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with apical area bluish; hind wing bluish, the outer border darker, and submarginal spots prominent.</p>

<p>The name <b>pingasa</b> (Moore) may be used to denote a large form of the extreme wet-season type in which the black ground-colour is greatly extended.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914).&#x2014;The eggs are deposited usually in evergreen jungle at above 100 feet. They are laid singly, and often very close to the ground. Pupa attached to the underside of a leaf or thin twig. The food-plant is <i>Capparis heyneana</i> Wall.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a strong flier, but keeps to the shade of the underwood. The female may be found more often at rest than the male; it does not usually frequent flowers, and is never found at water. The female is never found flying in the same way as the male and is generally seen fluttering around in the underwood, looking like a <i>Danaus aglea</i> (Cram.).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India;</span> not rare.</p>

<p>163 <i>b.</i> <b>Valeria ceylanica naraka</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Eronia naraka</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 591 (S. Andamans).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia naraka</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 179, pl. 609, figs. 1, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>d</i>, 1 <i>f</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i>, 1 <i>g</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia pingasa naraka</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 179.</p>

<p><i>Pareronia ceylanica naraka</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 84.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> similar to the nominotypical form. Fore wing with one (wet form) or two (dry form) white subapical spots.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> markings whiter than in the nominotypical form.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with larger and lighter markings. In the dry form the wing is brownish-white, excepting the darker border, and the veins are only lightly brown.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> common.</p>

<p><b>Valeria valeria</b> (Cramer, 1776).</p>

<p>I am indebted to Dr. A. S. Corbet for some enlightenment on this species, which he is investigating. <i>V valeria</i> can be divided into two groups, which may be termed the <i>Hippia</i> and <i>Valeria</i> groups. These groups are especially distinguished by the form of the genital armature. The valve is furnished with a small ventral process which is apparently the harpe. In the <i>Hippia</i> group this process is well rounded and broad ventrally, and projects beyond the edge of the valve. The {\ae}deagus is strongly curved posteriorly. In the <i>valeria</i> group the harpe is long and narrow, does not project ventrally, and is directed dorsad, lying entirely within the valve. The {ae}deagus is straight or only slightly curved, and is anteriorly broader than in the <i>hippia</i> forms. Only the <i>Hippia</i> group is known to occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>{\male} <i>Upperside</i> bluish-white, paler than in <i>ceylanica</i> (Feld.).</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> also whiter; all the veins strongly defined by black. Fore wing with submarginal spots which are also well marked on the underside of both wings.</p>

<p>{\female} Dimorphic in the Indian subspecies, and trimorphic in some other areas. The principal form resembles <i>ceylanica</i> (Feld.), but is whiter, with more prominent submarginal spots. The second and rarer form has the hind wing upperside with yellow discal area</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1914):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014; A pointed oval, the apex crowned with a circle of 7 or 8 small, pointed teeth; 17 longitudinal, minutely beaded ribs. White at first, and later with four bands of faded rose Laid. in batches of six and over on the upperside of a leaf. (Colonel Coleridge, who has bred <i>hippia</i>, saya that the eggs are laid in batches of four and more, <i>teste</i> Peile, in MS.).</p>

<p><i>Larva</i> and <i>pupa.</i>&#x2014;Closely resembling <i>p. ceylanica</i> (Feld.), the larva less marked. The food-plant is <i>Capparis heyneana</i> Wall.</p>

<p>The butterfly does not frequent heavy jungle, and likes the sun.</p>

<p>The habits of the {\female} are thus described by Fruhstorfer (1910):&#x2014; ``The females by their sluggish flight resemble the Danaids to such an extent that in Tenasserim I was constantly taking them for <i>Danais grammica</i>, often as they had already deceived me. In Sumatra and Java the yellow females mimic the likewise yellow <i>Danais aspasia</i> and <i>philomela</i>, but yellow females also occur in South India, where there is no yellow Danaid model.''</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and Hainan, south to Flores and the South Philippines. A number of subspecies, of which only one occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>164. <b>Valeria valeria hippia</b> (Fabricius). (Pl. II, fig. 19, larva).</p>

<p><i>Papilio hippia</i>, Fabricius, 1787, p. 55; Donovan, 1800, pl. xxv, fig. 1 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia hippia</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 139 (Bombay); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 573 (Kanara); Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 591 (Mussooree); de Rh\'e-Philipe, 1902, p. 492.</p>

<p><i>Eronia hippia</i>, Elwes, 1888, p. 419; Manders 1890, p. 532; Baker, 1891, p. 1, pl. <i>i</i> (genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia hippia</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 278; Swinhoe, 1909, p. 175, pl. 607, figs 1, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 1 <i>f</i> ({\female} form), 1 <i>h</i> (larva), 1 <i>i</i> (pupa); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 364 (Kumaon); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 386 (Palni Hills); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1914, p. 99, pl. <i>i</i>, figs. 63 ({\male}), 63 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (early stages); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia valeria hippia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 178; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 84, pl. ix, fig. B 20.3 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 75, pl. xxi, fig. 208 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia philomela</i>, Fabricius, 1793, p. 57; Donovan, 1800, pl. xxv, fig. 3 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia valeria hippia</i> {\female} f. <i>philomela</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 178; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 84.</p>

<p><i>Eronia gea</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 190 ({\male}{\female}, Bengal).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia gea</i>, Rothnoy, 1882, p. 35 (Barrackpore); de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b</i> p. 51; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 139 ({\female} Poona, Bombay); id., 1886, p. 431 (Mhow); Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887 <i>a</i>, p. 431 (Tavoy); Aiken, 1887, p. 41 (Bombay); Hampon, 1889, p. 363; Watson, 1891, p. 29 (Pauk and Tilin).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia gea</i>, Swinhoe, 1909, p. 175, pl. 607, figs. 1 <i>d</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>e</i> ({\female}) (dry form), 1 <i>g</i> ({\female}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Pareronia valeria hippia</i> f. <i>gea</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 178, <i>t.</i> 66 <i>c</i> ({\male}), <i>b</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Nepheronia lutescens</i>, Elwes &amp; de Nic'{e}ville (<i>non</i> Butl.), 1887, p. 431 (Tavoy) (=<i>philomela</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour a clear pale blue of a much deeper tint than in <i>V avatar</i> (Moore); all the veins defined with black. Fore wing with costa broadly, apex and outer margin very broadly, black, the marginal black narrowed towards the tornus, and bearing a series of submarginal bluish-white spots that are variable in number; the spot in area 3 shifted inwards; sometimes the posterior two spots are all but joined on to the discal stripes. Hind wing with costal and inner margins broadly whitish; outer margin broadly black, especially at apex, the black area covered, except at the tornus, with androconia</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> paler blue, the outer margins obscurely fuscous; a submarginal series of very indistinct whitish lunulate spots. Fore wing with the veins more or less broadly bordered with black, which widens towards the margin; apex broadly, outer margin decreasingly to the tornus, suffused with veins 6, 7, and 8 broadly, the rest of the veins very narrowly, edged with black; a very fine black line in area 1 <i>c.</i> Cilia of both wings very narrow and white. Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen fuscous, the thorax clothed with long bluish hairs; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen pale silvery bluish-white.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> black with bluish-white markings. Fore wing with two streaks in the cell, the anterior one from the extreme base, the posterior one from the end of the basal third, but extending beyond the anterior streak; a series of post-cellular stripes, very irregular in length; the stripe in area 1 <i>c</i> the longest, angulate anteriorly and divided longitudinally from near its base, the stripe in area 3 short and broad, forming an elongate spot those in the anterior areas more or less obliquely placed; a submarginal series of spots, of which the spot in area 3 is shifted inwards, and those opposite the apex curved backwards. Hind wing with costa and inner margin broadly white; cell with two narrow streaks, joined at the base; post-cellular stripes and submarginal spots much as on the fore wing, but more regular.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the upperside, but the ground-colour dull, dusky, and diffuse, the margins broader but less clearly defined; apical area of fore wing dusted with whitish. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen much as in the male but darker.</p>

<p>{\female} <b>philomela</b> (Fabr.).&#x2014;Markings on both sides much as in the principal form. Hind wing <i>upperside</i> at base of area 1 <i>a</i>, aver the whole of areas 1 <i>b</i> and 1 <i>c</i>, area of the cell, and at base of area 2 suffused with bright yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the above areas dull ochraceous. The extent of this yellow area is variable, in some specimens more restricted, in others it spreads further towards the costa.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form</i> <b>gea</b> (Feld.).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with more extended white area, the veins less darkened.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> markings white and more extended, the hind wing cell almost entirely white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with apex of fore wing and entire hind wing pale reddish-brown, the latter with veins finely lined, and with deep brown submarginal and marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 65-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and Siam; common, less so in Sikkim.</p>

<p>Subfamily COLIADIN{\AE} Aurivillius.</p>

<p><i>Coliadin{\ae}</i>, Aurivillius, 1910, p. 63; Talbot, 1935, p. 408.</p>

<p><i>Rhodocerini</i>, Klots, 1931, pp. 152, 157 (=tribe of Pierin{\ae}.)</p>

<p>Wing-coloration usually yellow or orange. Fore wing with vein 6 always emitted from 7; 7 and 8 coincident. Hind wing with the precostal vein greatly reduced or absent. Body robust. Palpus with third segment very short; underside of palpus smoothly scaled scaled or rarely clothed with bristles and hairs; antennal club gradual, a raised line present.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (from <i>Klots</i>, 1931).&#x2014;Tegumen short, usually considerably shorter than the uncus; juxta usually bar-like, and expanded at the tip; harpe minute or absent.</p>

<p>The food-plants of the larv{\ae}, as far as is known, belong mostly to the family Leguminos{\ae}, besides which <i>Gonepteryx</i> feeds upon <i>Rhamnus</i> (Rhamne{\ae}), and some <i>Colias</i> upon <i>Vaccinium</i> (Ericace{\ae}). No species of the Pierin{\ae} appear to feed upon any of these plants.</p>

<p><i>Key to Genera.</i></p>

<p>Hind wing with precostal vein short and directed basad ... .. .. .. . .</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Hind wing with precostal vein absent or absolete.</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>2. Fore wing with margin between veins 6 and 7+8 falcate or pointed . ....</p>

<p>[p. 501. <span class="smallcaps">Dercas</span> Doubl.,</p>

<p>Fore wing with apical margin rounded . .</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>3. Hind wing with precostal vein thick and rather short. {\male} with oval sex-patch at base of vein 7 on upperside .. . ...</p>

<p>[p. 489. <span class="smallcaps">Catopsillia</span> H\dd{u}bn.,</p>

<p>Hind wing with precostal vein thin; no sexpatch ... .. .... . ..</p>

<p>[p. 511. <span class="smallcaps">Gandaca</span> Moore,</p>

<p>4. Fore wing with vein 10 from the cell. ... . </p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>Fore wing with vein 10 from the stem of 7+8 and 9 . . .. .. .. ..</p>

<p>[p. 540. <span class="smallcaps">Colias</span> Fabr.,</p>

<p>5. Hind wing produced to a sharp tooth at vein 4. Palpi with short hair .... .. .</p>

<p>[Leach, p. 505. <span class="smallcaps">Gonepteryx</span></p>

<p>Hind wing rounded. Palpi not hairy</p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Eurema</span> H\dd{u}bn., [p. 513.</p>

<p>Genus <b>CATOPSILIA</b> H\dd{u}bner. (Fig. 167).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 98; Scudder, 1872, p. 58 (type, <i>crocale</i> Cramer); Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 121; Bingham, 1902, p. 363 (migration); Manders, 1904 <i>b</i>, pp. 701-6 (migration); Moore, 1907, p. 80; Bingham, 1907, p. 59; Verity, 1909, p. 275; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161; Williams, 1919, pp. 147-53 (migration); Klots, 1929, pp. 203-14, pl. xx (genitalia); id., 1931, p. 177; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 75; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 142 (type, <i>crocale</i> Cramer, 1775); Peile, 1937, p. 58.</p>

<p><i>Murtia</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 98; 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 142 (type, <i>minna</i> Herbst).</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>C. crocale</i> (Cramer).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing elongate; costa regularly and widely arched; apex moderately acute; outer margin short, slightly concave; tornus obtuse; inner margin long, about four-fifths the length of costa; cell less than half the length of wing; vein 11 from the cell well basad; vein 10 from near end of cell; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9 at about a third from end of cell to apex; 5 from the cell, with <i>mdc</i> oblique and at least half as long as <i>ldc.</i> Hind wing very broad; costa strongly arched; apexnot well marked; outer margin very slightly arched; tornus angular, well marked; inner margin almost straight from base, slightly concave near apex; cell short and broad; <i>mdc</i> and <i>ldc</i> slightly oblique, the latter attenuate in its upper half; precostal vein short, curved slightly basad; vein 8 strongly angular near base. Antenn{\ae} short and stout, not half lenght of fore wing; club long and gradual, truncate at apex. Palpus with third segment short and oval</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p>Male with secondary sexual characters. Fore wing underside, near base of inner margin, with a long hair-pencil directed forwards; hind wing upperside, in area 7 near the base, with an oval patch of androconia.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;Penis long and curved, bearing chitinized teeth, and with a long basal prong; saccus thick, shorter than the tegumen and uncus combined; tegumen short, usually with a mid-dorsal lobe; uncus slender, free part long; valve with a rounded dorsal process, and an angulate, somewhat rounded distal process (from <i>Klots</i>, 1931). The genus agrees with <i>Colias</i> in the long basal prong of the penis, the short saccus, and the dorsal lobe of the tegumen.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The species are very common and sometimes congregate in swarms. Migratory flights often take place, and 75 per cent. of the individuals are males, but the females often lay eggs during migration. Both sexes are easily caught at flower, where they settle to rest the wings closed; they are also partial to wet places. The larv{\ae} are sometimes in such numbers as to constitute a pest.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole Indo-Australian Region and Africa; allied groups are found in South America. Five species are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key to Species.</i></p>

<p>1. Underside: at all seasons not marked with any transverse reddish-brown strig{\ae}. ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Underside: at all seasons marked with transverse reddish-brown strig{\ae} ..</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing upperside pale yellow or white</p>

<p>3. [p. 495.</p>

<p>Hind wing upperside entirely orange ... ....</p>

<p><i>scylla</i> (Linn.),</p>

<p>3. Antenn{\ae} black. Fore wing upperside below apex with a continuous marginal black line; underside without discal ocelli. {\female} with costa black from base to apex .. . .</p>

<p>[p. 490. <i>crocale</i> (Cram.),</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} red. Fore wing upperside below apex with a macular marginal black border. Underside of both wings with a small reddish-brown discocellular ocellus. {\female} with costa only black near the apex .... ..    .. .. . </p>

<p>[p. 493. <i>pomona</i> (Fabr.),</p>

<p>4. Fore wing upperside below apex with marginal dark border continuous and often broad ..</p>

<p>[p. 497. <i>pyranthe</i> (Linn.),</p>

<P>Fore wing upperside below apex with a macular marginal dark border, always narrow, sometimes brown</P>

<p>[p. 499. <i>florella</i> (Fabr.),</p>

<p><b>Catopsilia crocale</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p>The question whether this species and <i>pomona</i> (Fabr.) are or are not conspecific remains still a puzzle to lepidopterists. In the Indian area there is no difficulty in separating them, but in the Malayan islands, and in Australia and New Guinea, the characters, so constant in India, become intermixed, and much difficulty is experienced in separating the two forms. It is true that no difference can be found between the male genitalia of <i>crocale</i> and <i>pomona</i>, but this is not a proof of their conspecificity. They are not seasonal forms of one species, for both occur throughout the year in the same area. Corbet (1937 <i>a</i> p. 50) in Malaya observed that specimens found <i>in copula</i> were always <i>crocale</i> &#215; <i>crocale</i> and <i>pomona</i> &#215; <i>pomona.</i> Large collections of lar{\ae} from a single <i>Cassia</i> bush produced all <i>crocale.</i> Corbet remarks: `` I feel certain that <i>pomona</i> and <i>crocale</i> are not conspecific in Malaya, whatever may be the position in more easterly parts of their range.''</p>

<p><i>C. crocale</i> can be distinguished by the characters given in the key. In other respects the species is very variable In the Indian area two forms of each sex can be distinguished.</p> 

<p>A good account of the two species in Sumatra is given by Dr. Martin in de Nic\'eville &amp; Martin 1896, pp. 357-555.</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;White at first, turning yellow later.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Bright green, with a dark dorsal line and a spiracular broad white line suffused with yellow on segments 2 to 5; tubercles green, frequently dark metallic blue, increasing in size towards the spiracular region where they often form  a broad supra-spiracular band; in individuals with blue tubercles the head tubercles are also blue. Length, 41 mm.; breadth, 5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Of the normal smooth type, with slight ventral wing-bulge and tail suspension. Snout conical, continued smoothly and evenly into the outlines of the head. Cremaster a truncated triangle as broad at the base as it is long, much hollowed out ventrally, with low, dorsal, parallel extensor ridges. Colour green; tip of snout, edge of cremaster, and supra-spiracular line along abdomen, yellow. Length, 28 mm.; breadth, 7 mm. at segment 7; snout, 2 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly on the upperside of a leaf or on a bud or shoot. The larva lies along and over the midrib. It is able to jump, and can clear a space of several inches. It is able to jump, and can clear a space of several inches. It can exude a green, rather strong-smelling liquid from the mouth when attacked; this may be the reason why it is less liable to parasitic attack than many others of the family. The species has been bred on most species of <i>Cassia</i>, upon <i>Bauhinia racemosa</i> Lam. and <i>Butea frondosa</i> Roxb.; the favourite, however, is <i>Cassia siamea</i> Lam.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a fast flier, rises high in the air, and can cover long distances; the flight is straight, in powerful, long, up-and-down curves.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole Indo-Australian Region from South China to the Solomon Islands. Only the nomino-typical race occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>165. <b>Catopsilia crocale crocale</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio crocale, Cramer</i>, 1775, p. 87, pl. Iv, figs. C, D ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Callidryas crocale</i>, Butler, 1869-74, p. 22, pl. ix, figs. 1, 2, 3, 6 ({\male}{\female}); Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 591 (Andamans and Nicobars); Butler, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 2 (Cachar).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale</i>, Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, pp. 237, 251 (Andamans); Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 122, pl. xlviii, figs 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <b>b</b> ({\male}{\female}, larca, pupa); id., 1882, p. 253 (N.W. Himalayas); id., 1886, p. 49 (Mergui); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 371 (Cachar); Swinhoe, 1886, p. 432 (Mhow); Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 135; Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 431 (Tavoy); Elwes, 1888, p. 411; Hampson, 1889, p. 361; Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 360 (early stages); Martin, 1896, p. 490 (bionomic notes); Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 570; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 586; de nic\'eville &amp; K\dd{u}hn, 1898, p. 271, pl. <i>i</i>, figs 5, 5 <i>a</i>, 5 <i>b</i> (larva and pupa);  Moore, 1907, p. 84, pl. 576, figs. 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i>, 1 <i>d</i> (larva and pupa); Bingham, 1907, p. 219 (part.); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 60, <i>t.</i> 24 <i>a</i> (imago); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. <i>t.</i> 69 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 363 (Kumaon); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 385 (Palni Hills); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1913, p. 517, pl. 1, figs. 72, 73 ({\male}), 72 <i>a</i>, 73 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (early stages); Dixey, 1924, p. 9 (? conspecific with <i>pomona</i>); id., 1924, p. 65 (bionomics); id., 1924, p. 84 (pupa); Ormiston 1924, p. 83; Klots, 1929, pl. xxii, figs. 14 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> (genitalia); id., 1932, pl. vii, fig. 30 (genitalia); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75, pl. ix, fig. B 11.1 ({\female}) id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 199 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 58, pl. viii, figs 66, 67 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcmeone</i>, Cramer, 1777, p. 71, pl. cxli, fig. E ({\male}, Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale crocale</i> f. <i>alcmene</i> (sic), Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162, <i>t.</i> 69 <i>c</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale</i>, Moore, 1907, pl. 576, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio jugurtha</i>, Cramer, 1777, p. 138, pl. clxxxvii, figs. E, F ({\female}, Coromandel)</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale crocale</i> {\female} f. <i>jugurtha</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162, <i>t.</i> 69 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale</i>, Moore, 1907, pl. 576, fig. 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia jugurtha</i>, Godart, 1819, pp. 86, 96 (Bengal and Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale crocale</i> {\female} f. <i>jugurthina</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163, <i>t.</i> 68 <i>e</i> (2) ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia heera</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 140 ({\male}{\female}, Poona).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia crocale crocale</i> {\male} f. <i>flavescens</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162, <i>t.</i> 69 <i>c</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour chalky-white, with either proximal yellow areas or entirely suffused with yellow. Fore wing with costa narrowly black to the base; outer margin with narrow black border, wider at the apex and narrowing posteriorly to about vein 2 or sometimes to the tornus. Hind wing unmarked, rarely with marginal black vein-dots.</p>

<p>Fore wing often white in the posterior distal area.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> creamy-white to yellow. Fore wing with a black discocellular spot, usually forming a bar to the costa costal margin black from base to apex; an outer marginal black border, wide at the apex, reaching the tornus, its inner edge more or less dentate; an anterior post-discal black band, reaching vein 3, and sometimes continued as two spots in 2 and 1 <i>b;</i> this  band is sometimes rather broad at the costa, cutting off two subapical spots of ground-colour. Hind wing with outer marginal black border, more or less dentate  on its inner edge; a blackish submarginal line, more or less heavily marked, and usually formed of more or less distinct lunules, cutting off submarginal spots of the ground-colour.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the {\male}, varying to ochraceous-buff. Antenn{\ae} black.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>alcmeone</b> (Cram.).&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> with proximal third of fore wing and proximal half of hind wing yellow, the distal areas white. The commonest form.</p>

<p>{\male} form <b>flavescens</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> entirely yellow.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>crocale</b> (Cram.).&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> pale to deep yellow, the black markings heavy.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>jugurtha</b> (Cram.).&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> white; both wings with yellow proximal areas, more extended on hind wing. Hind wing with or without a submarginal black line.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>jugurthina</b> (Godt.).&#x2014;Resembles <i>jugurtha</i>, but is witout yellow colouring.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 55-75 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span>, to South China, the Philippines, Borneo, Sumatra, and Java. Common, but is rare on the Andaman Islands.</p>

<p>166. <b>Catopsilia pomona</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p><i>Papilio pomona</i>, Fabricius, 1775, p. 479 (New Holland); Donovan, 1805, pl. xvii, fig. 3 (imago).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pomona</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 60; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163, <i>t.</i> 69 <i>b</i> ({\female}); Ormiston, 1924, p. 83; Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 199 (Baluchistan); Drosihn, 1933, p. 30, text-fig. 5, <i>t.</i> 3-5 (genitalia) (conspecific with <i>crocale</i>); Dixey, 1933, p. 20 (evidence that <i>pomona</i> may be conspecific with <i>crocale</i>); Peile, 1937, p. 58, pl. viii, fig. 68 ({\female}), fig. 69 ({\female} f. <i>catilla</i> Cram.).</p>

<p><i>Papilio catilla</i>, Cramer, 1779, p. 63, pl. ccxix, figs. D, E ({\female}, Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Callidryas catilla</i>, Butler, 1869 <i>a</i>, p. 222 (Ceylon); id., 1869-74, p. 24, pl. ix, figs. 7-10 ({\male}{\female}); id., 1870 <i>b</i>, p. 727 (Gujerat).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia catilla</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 591 (Andamans); id., 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 837 (Burma); Butler, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 2 (Cachar); id., 1879 <i>b</i>, p. 551; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 122, pl. xlvii, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 251 (Andamans); Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 140; id., 1886, p. 432 (Mhow); Moore, 1886, p. 49 (Mergui); Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 431 (Tavoy); Elwes, 1888, p. 411; Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 361; Manders, 1890, p. 533; Martin, 1896, p. 490; de Nic\'eville, 1900, p. 251.</p>

<p><i>Catopsilla pomona</i> {\female} f. <i>catilla</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163, <i>t.</i> 69 <i>b</i> ({\female}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75; Peile, 1937, p. 59, pl. viii, fig. 69 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio hilaria</i>, Stoll, 1781, p. 95, pl. cccxxxix, figs. A, B ({\male}, Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Callidryas hilaria</i>, Moore, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 493; id., 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 760.</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia hilaria</i>, Moore, 1907, p. 84, pl. 576, figs. 1 <i>e</i>, <i>f</i> ({\male}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pomona</i> {\male} f. <i>hilaria</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163, t. 69 <i>c</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pomona</i> {\female} f. <i>nivescens</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163, t. 69 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pomona</i> {\female} f. <i>siscia</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163.</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pomona</i> {\female} f. <i>bidotata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163.</p>

<p>{\male}. Closely resembles <i>crocale</i> (Cram.). <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with costal margin only black at the apex, and outer marginal narrow border macular. Ground-colour of both wings white, the proximal areas yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> greenish-white; both wings with a discocellular silvery spot ringed with reddish-brown. Fore wing sometimes with a post-discal irregular reddish-brown line, more or less distinct, that runs from the costa obliquely outwards to vein 7, and then obliquely inwards to vein 2. Hind wing at the base of area 5 with a second spot like the one on the discocellular; sometimes a post-discal of small reddish-brown spots, more or less distinct, most specimens with marginal reddish-brown vein-dots. Antenn{\ae} red.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>Upperside</i> sulphur-yellow to white. Fore wing with costa only black for about the apical third or less; outer marginal black border narrower than is usual in <i>crocale</i>, and more dentate on its inner edge, sometimes macular; an anterior post-discal series of blackish-brown spots, sometimes reaching area 1 <i>b;</i> a prominent rounded discocellular blackish-brown spot. Hind wing with small blackish or reddish-brown marginal vein-spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> ground-colour variable, reddish-brown, ochraceous, deep yellow to greenish-yellow or white; markings as in the  {\male} but more prominent. Fore wing, in the darker forms, with reddish-brown apical and marginal border. Hind wing often with reddish-purple blotches.</p>

<p>{\male} form <b>hilaria</b> (Stoll).&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> with yellow proximal and white distal areas. The usual form in India, where the entirely yellow form appears to be absent.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>catilla</b> (Cram.).&#x2014;<i>Underside</i> of both wings with a reddish-purple discal patch, which is particularly large on the hind wing; ground-colour yellow to ochraceous.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>bidotata</b> Fruhst.&#x2014; Hind wing <i>underside</i> with two large subcostal reddish-purple patches.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>siscia</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;Markings as in <i>catilla</i>, but the ground-colour white; a rare form.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>nivescens</b> Fruhst.&#x2014;Ground-colour white on both sides; rare.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 55-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, in de Nic\'eville, 1900, p. 251):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``The head is round, green, clypeus edged with brown, covered with small shiny black tubercles which do not hide the colour of the head; the anal flap is rounded, but looks square at the extremity, and is covered with rows of small black tubercles of which only the row along the spiracular line is conspicuous. The spiracles are oval shiny, and white. The colour is green, with a spiracular white band touched with bright yellow on segments 2 to 5, and these segments, especially 3 and 4, are distinctly flanged on the spiracular line as in the larva of <i>Hebomoia australis</i> Butler, though not to so great an extent. Length, 51 mm.''</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``The pupa is the same as that of <i>C. crocale</i> at first sight, but the dorsal line of the thorax is absolutely parallel to the longitudinal axis of the pupa for two-thirds of its length, consequently the hind part just before the margin is perpendicular to this part, <i>i</i>, <i>e.</i>, is raised suddenly but very slightly above the front margin of segment 4, and the front end of this parallel dorsal line is at an angle, and a sharpish angle, with the front slope of the thorax the cremaster is distinctly bifid at at the extremity, and hassome shiny, very stout, black suspensory hooks dorsally as well as at the extremity. There is a dorsal rugose black tip to well as at the extremity. There is a dorsal rugose black tip to the snout terminating the head, which snout is cylindrical in its apical half; there is no black line round the eye as in <i>C. crocale</i>, and there is a dark green-blue dorsal line which is yellow on the thorax as well as the supra-spiracular yellow line. Length, 34 mm.; length of snout, 3 mm.; breadth at segment 7, 9 mm.; height at apex of curve of wings (segment 6), 10 mm.; height at the apex of the thorax, 8 mm.''</p>

<p>The above account was first published by de Nic\'eville, and is taken from Bingham, 1907.</p>

<p>According to Bell, the food-plant is <i>Cassia fistula</i> L.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> South China to the Solomon Islands and Australia; common.</p>

<p><b>Catopsilia scylla</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>This species is easily recognized by the hind wing upperside being entirely yellow.</p>

<p>It is a Malayan species which has spread northwards into Burma. It is less common than the other species of the genus, being rather local.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``Dark velvety green, with a yellowish-white lateral streak and some very minute black spots anterior to the streak, the whole surface delicately ringed or indented like a leech'' (<i>Martin</i>, 1896).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Has a pointed head like that of <i>C. crocale</i>, but is shorter and more convex than the slender pupa of that species'' <i>Martin</i>, 1896).</p>

<p>Also figured by Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, pl. 1, figs. 9, 9 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa).</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to the Moluccas, North Australia, Celebes, and Luzon. About ten subspecies have been named, of which one os found in Southern Burma.</p>

<p>167 <b>Catopsilia scylla scylla</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p><i>Papilio scylla</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1763, p. 20.</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia scylla</i>, Distant, 1885 p. 298, pl. xxiv, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2 ({\female}) (Malay Peninsula); de Nic\'eville &amp; Martin, 1896, p. 493 (Sumatra); Bingham, 1907, p. 224; Moore, 1907, p. 95, pl. 578, figs 2 ({\male}), 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\female}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75, pl. ix, fig. B 11.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia scylla scylla</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 163, t. 68 <i>a</i> (figs. 3, 4, imago); Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1934, p. 105, pl. iv, fig. 36 ({\male}, Malay peninsula.).</p>

<p><i>Papilio cornelia</i>, Fabricius, 1787, p. 21 ({\male}, Tranquebar)</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing white; costa edged with black; outer margin with a narrow black border, wider at the apex, its inner edge dentate, from apex to tornus, and of nearly even width throughout. Hind wing rich cadmium-yellow, slightly paler towards the base, usually with small marginal black spots towards the veins.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> rich cadmium or chrome-yellow. Fore wing with the posterior area below the cell and vein 2 pure white, the yellow, however, extends down to the tornal angle in a curve. Both wings with a discocellular spot, pinkish and ringed with darker brownish-pink; similar spots on the hind wing usually in the base of the cell and in areas 7 and 5, and below the origin of vein 2; usually a post-discal series of lunular diffuse markings of similar brownish-pink scales. Antenn{\ae} and upperside of head reddish-brown; thorax clothed with fuscous-grey hairs, abdomen yellow; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing dull creamy white, marginal black broader; a post-discal series of illdefined diffuse black spots curved strongly inwards anteriorly; often a small discocellular diffuse black ring. Hind wing as in the {\male}, the yellow of a duller shade that turns to pale pinkish-white towards basal area above the cell; a post-discal series, sometimes obsolescent, of dull brownish-black lunular markings; marginal spots much larger and duller in colour than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, but all black markings of upperside replaced by rich pinkish-red tints.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 60-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> common. Also found in the Malay Peninsula, Siam, Indo-China, Sumatra, and Java.</p>

<p><b>Catopsilia pyranthe</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> chalky-white or greenish. Fore wing with apical and marginal narrow black border; a black discocellular spot which may be absent Hind wing either unmarked or with a marginal series of black vein-dots or spots which may form a continuous line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing and anterior part of fore wing pale ochraceous mottled with brown strig{\ae}.</p>

<p>{\female}. As in the {\male}, but black margins a little broader. Fore wing with a black discocellular spot and black costal border;</p>

<p><i>usually</i> a short anterior, post-discal, macular black band, <i>Underside</i> usually with prominent discocellular ring-spots.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Spindle-shaped, narrowly truncate at the top; 12 longitudinal ridges which, however, do not form teeth at the top, although they all reach the edge. White at first, turning yellow.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Very similar to that of <i>crocale</i> except that there are tubercles on the venter. Dark gras-green, the head lighter, and venter of a green which is between the two.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;The counterpart of that of <i>crocale.</i> Head produced into a short, perfectly straight snout, short and pyramidal in shape. Dark green, lighter on venter; a yellow dorsal line on thorax; a similarly yellow supra-spiracular line from end to end. Length, 22.5 mm.; breadth, nearly 6 mm. at segment 7.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;South China to Australia and the Pacific. Four subspecies, of which the nominotypical one is found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>168. <i>Catopsilia pyranthe pyranthe</i> (Linn{\ae}us). (Fig. 168 <i>b;</i> Pl. II, figs. 15 (larva), 16 (pupa)).</p>

<p><i>Papilio pyranthe</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 469; Donovan, 1798, pl. xxxii, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Callidryas pyranthe</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 56, pl. 1, figs. 8, 8 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa); id., 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 493; id., 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 759 (Himalayas); Butler, 1869-74, p. 36, pl. xv, figs. 8-10 ({\male}{\female}); id., 1870 <i>b</i>, p. 727 (Gujerat).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pyranthe</i>, Moore 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 124, pl. xlvii, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}) (Ceylon); id., 1882, p. 253 (N.W. Himalayas); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 511 (Karachi); id., 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 139; id., 1886, p. 432 (Mhow); Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 135; Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 371 (Cachar); Aitken, 1887, p. 41; Swinhoe, 1887, p. 279 (Karachi); Hampson, 1889, p. 361; Elwes, 188, p. 411; Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 360; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 586 (Mussooree, Dehra Dum); Dixey, 1902, p. 193 (dimorphism); Manders, 1904 <i>b</i>, p. 701, pl. xxxiv (breeding in Ceylon); Bingham, 1907, p. 221, fig. 56 <i>b;</i> Moore, 1907, p. 90, pl. 577, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}); Kershaw,1907, p. 100, pl. vii, fig. 9 ({\female}), pl. xi, fig. 5 ({\male}), pl. xiii, fig. 9 ({\male}), pl. 3 <i>a</i>, figs. 21, 22 (egg, larva, pupa) (Hong Kong); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 385 (Palni Hills); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 363 (Kumaon, up to 6,000 feet); Peile, 1911. p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1913, p. 520, pl. J, figs, 64 ({\male}), 64 <i>a</i> ({\female}), text-figs. of larva and pupa; Ghosh, 1914, pp. 29-32 (life-history); Ormiston, 1924, p. 84 (Ceylon); Klots, 1929, pl. xxii, fig 13 (genitalia); Deosihn, 1933, p. 24, text-fig. 2, t. 1 (genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pyranthe pyranthe</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162.</p>

<p><i>Papilio minna</i>, Herbst, 1792, p. 74, pl. Lxxxix, figs. 1, 2 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pyranthe Minna</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 199 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 59, pl. viii, fig. 70 ({\male}{\female}, as <i>pyranthe.</i>).</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcyone</i>, Cramer, 1775, p. 89, pl. lviii, figs. A, B, C ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia alcyone</i>, Moore, 1907, p. 94, pl. 578, figs. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\female}) (wet form).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> chalky white, slightly tinted in some specimens with green. Fore wing with a discocellular black spot; costa edged with black; an outer marginal black border, wide at the apex and narrowing slightly to the tornus, its inner edge slightly produced on the veins. Hind wing with marginal black vein-dots or with a continuous narrow border.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> greenish, with reddish-brown strig{\ae} and small discocellular spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, all black markings broader, and discocellular spot on fore wing larger. Fore wing with an anterior, short, black, post-discal band, sometimes much widened and partly or completely coalescing with the marginal border. Hind wing with a marginal narrow black band; usually some anterior post-discal spots.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, the discocellular spots better defined, with an outer red ring that encircles a silvery spot; hind wing with one or two similar spots on each side of the discocellulars. Both wings with a post-discal series of reddish-brown spots. Both sexes with antenn{\ae} reddish, head and thorax anteriorly brown, thorax  clothed posteriorly with long white hairs abdomen white; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 50-70 mm.</p>

<p>The name <b>minna</b> Herbst applies to a form, typically {\female}, in which the <i>upperside</i> of fore wing bears a heavy post-discal line, and the <i>underside</i> of the hind wing is more greenish, and is without discocellular or other spots. Apparently an extreme wet-season form.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913).&#x2014;The food-plant is usually <i>Cassiatora</i> Linna.; the larva feeds also upon other leguminous plants, and in the Deccan the chif one is <i>Cassia auriculata</i> Linn. The butterfly is not quite such a powerful flier as <i>crocale</i>, and keeps nearer to the ground as a rule.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span>, extending to Hainan, Formosa, and South China, south and east to Borneo, Java, Celebes, and the Philippines. Rare in the Andaman Islands, but common elsewhere in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Catopsilia florella</b> (Fabricius, 1775).</p>

<p><i>C. florella</i> (Fabr.) and <i>C. pyranthe</i> (Linn.) are very closely allied, and in India they often present forms which are very similar and difficult to separate. If there are two species, <i>C. florella</i> must be considered as an African one which has extended its range eastward. The nominotypical race is very common over the African continent, and is easily distinguished from the Indian race; an intermediate subspecies is found in Arabia. Seasonal dimorphism is not very marked. </p>

<p>It appears very possible that is only the dry-season form of <i>pyranthe.</i> The dated specimens in the British Museum were taken from December to April, whilst those of <i>pyranthe</i> were taken from June to October. Although I have followed Bingham in keeping these separate, I am rather disposed to think they are seasonal forms.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with or without a black discocellular spot; outer marginal reddish-brown or blackish spots which are free or connected only at the margin.</p>

<p>Hind wing <i>underside</i> as in <i>pyranthe</i> (Linn.), but with larger discocellular spots having prominent silvery centres.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> yellow to white. Fore wing with prominent discocellular spot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, the markings reddish-brown and more prominent.</p>

<p><i>Disribution.</i>&#x2014;Africa to Arabia, Persia, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span> (rare), <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to Indo-China, Hainan, and South China. Three subspecies, one in India.</p>

<p>169. <b>Catopsilia florella gnoma</b> (Fabricius). (Fig. 168 <i>a</i>, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio gnoma</i>, Fabricius, 1776, p. 828.</p>

<p><i>Callidryas gnoma</i>, Butler, 1869-74, p. 43, pl. xvi, figs. 1-4 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia gnoma</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 123, pl. xlviii, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\female}, larva, pupa); id., 1882, p. 253, (N.W. Himalayas); id., 1886, p. 49 (Mergui); id., 1907, p. 90, pl. 577, figs. 1 <i>e</i>, <i>f</i>, <i>g</i> ({\male}{\female}) (extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pyranthe</i> f. <i>gnoma</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162, t. 69 <i>e</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia florella gnoma</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 75, pl. ix, fig. B 11.5 ({\female}); Peile, 1937, p. 60, pl. viii, figs. 71, 72 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philippina</i>, Stoll, 1781, p. 139, pl. ccclxi, figs. C, D ({\female}, Coromandel).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia philippina</i>, Moore, 1907, pp. 91, 92, pl. 577, figs. 1 <i>e</i>, <i>f</i>, <i>g</i> ({\male}{\female}) (extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Papilio ilea</i>, Fabricius, 1798, p. 426.</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia ilea</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 124, pl. xlvii, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}) (Ceylon); Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 139 (Poona); id., 1887, p. 279 (Karachi); Moore, 1907, p. 91 (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Callidryas thisorella</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 609 (Bengal).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia thisorella</i>, Moore, 1907, p. 91, pl. 577, figs. 1 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia chryseis</i>, Butler (<i>non</i> Drury), 1879 <i>b</i>, pp. 551, 557; Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 591 (Andamans); id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 124, pl. xlvii, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon); Wood-mason &amp; Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 252 (Andamans); Moore, 1886, p. 49 (Mergui); id., 1907, p. 97.</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia pyranthe</i> f. <i>chryseis.</i> Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162, t. 69 <i>e</i> ({\male}) (wet form).</p>

<p><i>Catopsilia florella</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1907, p. 223; de Rh\'e-Philipe, 1908, p. 885 (Konkan); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 162, t. 69 <i>d</i> (imago); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 363 (Kumaon, up to 6,000 feet); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 385 (Palni Hills); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1913, p. 522 (early stages); Ormiston, 1924, p. 84 (Ceylon).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white, with reddish-brown markings. Fore wing with slight apical costal edging and marginal vein-spots reaching veins 3 or 2; a prominent black discocellular spot; these markings variable in size and sometimes quite absent. Hind wing usually with a marginal yellowish-pink line.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in <i>pyranthe</i> (Linn.), but with more prominent and silvery discocellular spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> greenish-yellow; reddish-brown markings as in the {\male}, but more distinct and always present; discellular spot larger. Hind wing sometimes with small reddish-brown marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}, the strig{\ae} and other markings more prominent and reddish-brown. Hind wing with three discal silvery spots, including a large one in the end of the cell.</p>

<p>The name <b>thisorella</b> (Boisduval) applies to an extreme dry-season form with the marginal markings on the fore wing <i>upperside</i> vestigial or absent, and the discocellular spots on both sides minute. The <i>underside</i> strongly yellowish-brown.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 50-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> common. <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>DERCAS</b> Doubleday.</p>

<p><i>Dercas</i>, Doubleday, 1847, p. 70 (<i>verhuelli</i> Hoev.); Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 45, pl. ii, fig. 1 (venation); de Nic\'eville, 1898 <i>c</i>, p. 478 (revision); Bingham, 1907, p. 225; R\dd{o}ber. 1907, p. 62; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 160; Klots 1931, p. 180; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 76; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 140 (type, <i>Colias verhuelli</i> Hoev., 1839).</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>D. verhuelli</i> (Hoeven).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa strongly arched, apex shortly produced into an acute point, much more so in the {\female} than in the {\male}; outer margin below apex concave, dentate at apices of veins 4, 5, and 6; tornus forms a blunt right angle; outer margin short, about half length of costa; inner margin long slightly sinuate; cell short and broad, not half length of costa; veins 10 and 11 from the cell, 10 from the end of the cell; 7+8 and 9 stalked half-way from cell to apex; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9 nearer the fork of these veins than to the cell; <i>mdc</i> about half as long as <i>idc</i>, both incurved Hind wing very broad, veins well apart; costa arched; outer margin angulate and shortly tailed at apex of vein 4, sloped obliquely outwards to that vein, thence obliquely inwards to tornus and again at an angle to middle of inner margin; cell very short and broad; precostal vein very short; <i>udc</i> about equal to <i>mdc</i>, less than half as long as <i>ldc</i>, the latter incurved and oblique. Antenn{\ae} very short, less than one-third length of costa of fore wing; club elongate, very gradual, roundly truncate at apex; palpi short third segment very short and oval; eyes large and prominent.</p>

<p>A small genus, comprising only four species, with seven subspecies. The species inhabit mountainous districts up to about 4,000 feet.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;China and the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Sumatra, and Borneo. Two Species are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key to Species.</i></p>

<p><i>a.</i> Hind wing with a conspicuous tooth or short tail at apex of vein 4 .. .. ..</p>

<P>[p. 502. <i>verhuelli</i> (Hoev.),</P>

<p><i>b.</i> Hind wing slightly angulate at apex of vein 4, but never produced into a tooth or short tail.</p>

<p>[p. 503. <i>lycorias</i> (Doubl.),</p>

<p><b>Dercas verhuelli</b> (Hoeven).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> yellow. Fore wing with a large, dark, apical patch which extends below vein 5; an outer dark narrow border ending in a point at or before vein 2, its inner edge crenulate.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but is paler, with less distinct markings. Fore wing marginal border not reaching below vein 3.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;South China to Tong-king Annam, and Siam, <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and the Malay Peninsula. Two subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p>170 <i>a.</i> <b>Dercas verhuelli doubledayi</b> Moore. (Fig. 169, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Dercas doubledayi</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 31.</p>

<p><i>Dercas verhuelli doubledayi</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 160, t. 67 <i>d</i> (as <i>menandrus</i>); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. ix, fig. B 13.1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Dercas verhuelli</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Hoev.), 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 760 (Bengal); Wallace, 1867, p. 398 (Silhet); Bingham, 1907, p. 226, fig. 57 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Dercas verhuelli pallidus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910 p. 161, t. 67 <i>d</i> ({\female}) (Assam).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> rich gamboge-yellow. Fore wing with discocellulars bordered on each side broadly with orange; a large apical patch of dark sienna-brown which is narrowed posteriorly and continued to a point at vein 1 <i>a</i> inner edge of this dark area angulate in area 5, and narrowly edged along its whole length with orange; a narrow post-discal orange band, inclined slightly inwards, from the angle in area 5 to vein 1 <i>a.</i> Hind wing slightly paler along the costal and inner margins; marginal sienna-brown vein-dots; indications of an orange band in continuation of the one ob the fore wing but very faint.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> paler and duller yellow. Fore wing markings much as on the upperside but the edging to the discocellulars, the post discal band, the square apical patch and outer border are blood-red, and on the margin this colour has a washed-out appearance; three red costal spots, and a more or less triangular streak of silvery scales that crosses the apical patch obliquely. Hind wing with the veins at base of cell, a looped line around the discocellulars, a faint trans-verse bar near apex of area 7, and the post-discal band reddish, this last extending from vein 1 <i>a</i> to vein 7 and sharply angulate or bent at vein 2. Antenn{\ae} brown, head and palpi above pink, thorax and abdomen pale yellow.</p>

<p>{\female} Resembles the {\male}, but the ground-colur is a pale sulphur-yellow. Fore wing <i>upperside</i> with the discal and post-discal markings only indicated by transparency from the <i>underside;</i> marginal border not extended below vein 3, but a spot of the same colour in the area below</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 60-70 mm.</p>

<p>The name <b>pallidus</b> Fruhst. refers to females with pure white coloration.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Northern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> not rare.</p>

<p>170 <i>b.</i> <b>Dercas verhuelli parva</b> Evans.</p>

<p><i>Dercas verhuelli parva</i>, Evans, 1924, p. 972 (Burma); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A much smaller rare. Fore wing not produced at the apex; outter margin only slightly crenulate. {\female} white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 50-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Dawna</span> <span class="smallcaps">Range</span> <span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> rare.</p>

<p><b>Dercas lycorias</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing usually with a prominent dark spot in area 3; other markings as in <i>verhuelli</i>, but the apical patch much smaller. Hind wing not produced at vein 4. A form occurs with the discal absent on the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;China to Tibet, <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>, Tong-king, and Annam. The nominotypical race is found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>171. <b>Dercas lycorias lycorias</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Rhodocera lycorias</i>, Doubleday, 1842, p. 77 ({\male}, <i>non</i> {\female}) (Mt. Kasiyae).</p>

<p><i>Dercas lycorias</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 227; Evans, 1915, p. 543 (Tibet: Lower Tsang Po); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. ix, fig. B 13.2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Dercas lycorias lycorias</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161, t. 67 <i>e</i> (Sikkim and Assam).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx wallichi</i>, Doubleday, 1848, p. xlvii.</p>

<p><i>Rhodocera wallichi</i>, Butler, 1866, p. 452.</p>

<p><i>Dercas wallichi</i>, Elwes, 1882, p. 402 (Sikkim); id., 1888, p. 415.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx urania</i>, Butler, 1865, p. 458, pl. xxvi, fig. 5 ({\female}, N. India).</p>

<p><i>Dercas decipiens</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1898 <i>c</i>, p. 483 ({\male}, Assam).</p>

<p><i>Dercas lycorias</i> f. <i>decipiens</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 228; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161, t, 67 <i>e</i> ({\male}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76.</p>

<p><i>Dercas brindaba</i>, Swinhoe, 1899, p. 107 (Assam).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing sulphur-yellow, darker and a richer yellow on the outer half, especially towards the apex; a small square apical patch, trisinuate on its inner edge, the middle sinus deep, the other much slighter, dark sienna-brown; a similarly coloured large round spot in area 3 and much smaller marginal spots or dots on veins 1 to 3 and 10 to 12. Hind wing pale yellow, paler along the costal and inner margins; veins 1 to 7 with minute dark sienna-brown marginal dots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> paler duller yellow, sprinkled with ferruginous dots; discocellulars on both wings marked with a geminate ferruginous spot bipupilled with silver. Fore wing with a short, oblique, silvery, costal streak just before apex, from which a ferruginous narrow band inclined obliquely inwards crosses the disc, passing through a comparatively large, similarly coloured round spot in area 3. Hind wing with a post-discal band as on fore wing, reaching neither the costa nor tornus; marginal dots as on upperside. Antenn{\ae} dark reddish-brown, palpi in front and head pinkish, thorax dark bluish-grey, abdomen pale yellow; underside of thorax and abdomen pale yellow.</p>

<p>{\female} Similar to the {\male}, but the ground-colour much paler; the ferruginous spot in area 3 of fore wing larger, especially on the underside.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female} 50-60 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>decipiens</b> de Nic\'e.&#x2014;The spot in area 3 of the fore wing is absent on both sides. This form appears to be confined to the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>, South-East Tibit, Tong-king, and Annam. Generally rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>GONEPTERYX</b> Leach. (Fig. 170).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx</i>, Leach, 1815 pp. 128, 716 (<i>rhamni</i> Linn.); Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, p. 45 (type, <i>rhamni</i> Linn.); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 60; Bingham, 1907, p. 228, fig. 58 (venation); Verity, 1909, p. 277; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161; Klots, 1929, p. 135; id., 1931, p. 179; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 76; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 140 (type, <i>papilio rhamni</i> Linn., 1758).</p>

<p><i>Rhodocera</i>, Boisduval &amp; Leconte, 1830, p. 70; Blanchard, 1840, p. 481 (type, <i>rhamni</i> Linn.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 140 (type, <i>Papilio rhamni</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>type</i> of the genus, <i>G. rhamni</i> (Linn.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa strongly bowed before the apex, slightly incurved or straight in the middle, and rounded at the base; apex acute and falcate; outer margin incurved below apex, posteriorly excurved; tornus broadly rounded; inner margin bisinuate; cell more than half length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell, wide apart; 7+8 and 9 on a long stalk; 6 from the stem of 7 +8 and 9, well beyond apex of cell; 5 from near upper angle of cell; <i>mdc</i> very short, not a quarter the length of <i>ldc</i>, which is strongly incurved. Hind wing broadly oval; outer margin at vein 3 produced to a prominent tooth, and at veins 2 and 4 very slightly dentate; precostal vein much reduced or absent; veins 8 and 7 swollen, prominent; median vein and veins 1 to 4 towards base and <i>ldc</i> less conspicuously swollen and prominent: cell more than half length of wing; <i>udc</i> longer than <i>mdc</i>, the latter very short; <i>ldc</i> longer than <i>udc</i>, incurved. In cell of fore wing three, in that of hind wing two, of the lost longitudinal veins conspicuously indicated. Antenn{\ae} short, about one-third length of fore wing; club compressed, gradual but well marked; palpi densely clothed with scales and short hairs, third segment short and oval; eyes prominent; head tufted above in a peak; tarsus without a pulvillus. Wings without sex-patches</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole Pal{\ae}arctic Region, the <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span> An allied genus in South America. Five species, including three in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key to Species.</i></p>

<p>1. Hind wing with outer margin not dentate between veins 1 <i>b</i> and 4, excepting the projection at vein 4 .. .. . </p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Hind wing with outer margin dentate between veins 1 <i>b</i> and 4 .. . . </p>

<p>[p. 509. <i>mahaguru</i> (Gist.),</p>

<p>2. {\male}. Upperside uniform sulphur-yellow. {\female} creamy white; fore wing with orange discocellular spot. .. .. . .. .. ..</p>

<p>[p. 506. <i>rhamni</i> (Linn.),</p>

<p>{\male}. Upperside of fore wing with proximal area yellow, distal area white; hind wing white. {\female} chalky-white; fore wing discocellular spot very amsll or absent</p>

<p>[p. 508. <i>farinosa</i> (Zell.),</p>

<p><b>Gonepteryx rhamni</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> sulphur-yellow; an orange discocellular spot on both wings.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pale yellowish-green.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> creamy-white. Hind wing with discocellular spot prominent, not dark-edged.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> greenish-white.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (from <i>Verity</i>, 1909):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Cylindrical-conical, with four longitudinal ribs. At first yellow, becoming darker, with the apex black.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;The young larva is uniform dark green. When full-fed it is thin, elongate, cylindrical, slightly flattened dorso-ventrally; anal plate spread over the two end segments. colour dull green, darker dorsally, the upper surface minutely tuberculate, the tubercles black, and stripe, its upper edge merging with the ground-colour; spiracles ringed with dark green; head lighter than the rest of the body. Length, 45-50 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Bright apple-green; a longitudinal whitish stripe on the sides of the abdomen; sparsely dotted with black and marked with fine strig{\ae}; region of head, base of wings, and anal extremity tinged with reddish.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are deposited one at a time on the underside of the leaves, and hatch in about 15 days. When not feeding the larva rests on a bed of silk in the middle of the upperside of a leaf. The pupal stage ordinarily lasts from 10 to 15 days, but it is supposed that many pup{\ae} lie dormant during the cold season. The larv{\ae} feed upon various species of <i>Rhammus</i>, and rarely upon <i>Vaccinium.</i> </p>

<p>The butterfly is usually everywhere common and frequents all types of country where the food-plant may grow. In Europe it hibernates during the winter.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole Pal{\ae}arctic Region, except the Canary Islands, extending to Japan and the Liukiu (or Riu Kiu) Islands,south to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Himalayas</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan.</span> Four out of the eight known subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>172 <i>a.</i> <b>Gonepteryx rhamni rhamni</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhamni</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 470.</p>

<p><i>Goniapteryx rhamni</i>, Humphrey &amp; Westwood, 1841, p. 13, pl. <i>i</i>, figs. 7-10 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhmni</i>, Lang, 1884, p. 65, pl. xiv, figs. 4 ({\male}{\female}), pl. xvi, fig. 4 (larva, pupa); Buckler, 1886, p. 145, pl. 1, fig. 2 (larva, pupa); Bingham, 1907, p. 229 (part.); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 60, t. 24 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}); Verity, 1909, pp. 281, 359, pl. xlvii, figs. 35-8 ({\male}{\female}); Klots, 1929, p. 142, pl. xx, fig. 2 (genitalia), fig. 5 (venation).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhamni rhamni</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 199 (Baluchistan); Peile, 1937, p. 60.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> pale, clear cadmium-yellow. Both wings with marginal reddish-brown vein-dots, and cilia of fore wing reddish-brown from vein 4 to apex; a deep orange discocellular spot on both wings, the spot on the hind wing the larger.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pale yellowish-green, fore wing with posterior discal and basal areas usually sulphur-yellow; discocellular spots on both wings dull ferruginous. Antenn{\ae}, palpi, and head above reddish-brown; thorax with dull yellowish-grey hairs; abdomen above black, yellow on the sides; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen yellowish-white.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> pale creamy-white; reddish-brown markings and discocellular spots as in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> greenish-white, the posterior two-thirds of fore wing white; discocellular spots duller than on upperside. Abdomen black above, white at the sides.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 60-70 mm.</p>

<p>The butterfly is very variable within narrow limits, and the literature is burdened with many names given to these insignificant European forms. There is a tendency to gynandromorphism, and many such examples have been recorded; these are usually the result of breeding, but faked examples are not unknown in collections. The larva is much subject to the attack of hymenopterous parasites.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Baluchistan</span> and <span class="smallcaps">North</span> <span class="smallcaps">Waziristan;</span> not rare. Extending over the whole of Europe to Central Asia and West Siberia. According to Evans (1932 <i>b</i>) it is not uncommon in North Baluchistan</p>

<p>172 <i>b</i> <b>Gonepteryx rhamni nepalensis</b> Doubleday</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx nepalensis</i>, Doubleday, 1847, p. 71; Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 59; Lang &amp; Moore, 1864, p. 103; Moore, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 493; id., 1882, p. 253.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhamni nepalensis</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 61, t. 24 <i>c;</i> Verity, 1909, p. 284, pl. xlviii, figs. 9, 10 ({\male}{\female}); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. ix, fig. B 14.1 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 61.</p>

<p><i>Rhodocera rhamni</i> var., Gray, 1846, p. 9, pl. v, fig 1 ({\male}) (Nepal); Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 589 (Mussooree).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhamni</i>, Hannyngton (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1910, p. 364 (Kumaon, 3,000-9000 feet).</p>

<p>{\male}. Usually smaller than the nominotypical race, and richer yellow. Fore wing with apex more distinct, forming a continuous line; discocellular spots on both wings larger and brighter.</p>

<p>{\female}. Less greenish than the nominotypical {\female}, but otherwise very similar.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Northern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> common. According to Peile (1937) the butterfly is abundant at Mussooree and at Murree, from end of April to June, and in August and October, frequenting especially open patches of grass in thistle-covered ground between woods; taken also at dampspots.</p>

<p>172 <i>c.</i> <b>Gonepteryx rhamni gilgitica</b> Tytler.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhamni gilgitica</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 252 ({\male}{\female}, Gilgit; Astor; Chilas); Bollow, 1930, p. 106; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76; Peile, 1937, p. 61.</p>

<p>{\male}. Apparently not different from <i>nepalensis</i> Doubl.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with extreme base of costa and apex of fore wing tinged with ochre-yellow. Hind wing with inner area and outer margin to vein 4 also tinged with the same colour.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Gilgit</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Astor</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Chilas;</span> common.</p>

<p>172 <i>d.</i> <b>Gonepteryx rhamni burmensis</b> Tytler.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhamni burmensis</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 252 ({\male}{\female}, South Shan States); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76; Peile, 1937, p. 61.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing darker yellow than on the hind wing.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> entirely yellow.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Shan</span> <span class="smallcaps">States;</span> not rare.</p>

<p><b>Gonepteryx farinosa</b> (Zeller, 1837).</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with apex less produced than in <i>rhamni</i> (Linn.), the yellow ground-colour stronger than on the hind wing; surface of wing a mealy appearance, due to vertically placed filiform scales interspersed among the normal ones. Both wings with yellow or pale orange discocellular dots, often absent on the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> dull yellow. Fore wing with outer part of discal area whitish basal area sulphur-yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> chalky white. Fore wing without the mealy appearance of the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> very pale yellow.</p>

<p><i>Disribution</i>&#x2014; Greece and Turkey to North-West Persia, Turkestan, and <span class="smallcaps">Chitral.</span> Two subspecies, one confined to chitral.</p>

<p>173. <b>Gonepteryx farinosa chitralensis</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Colias chitralensis</i>, Moore, 1905 <i>b</i>, p. 27.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx rhamni chitralensis</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 229, 230; Verity, 1909-11, pp. 284, 359, pl. Lxxii, fig. 13 ({\male} type), 14 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx zaneka chitralensis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx farinosa chitralensis</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 77; Peile 1937, p. 61.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with proximal half yellow merging into the white distal area. Hind wing white, yellow at the base.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing pale salmon-buff, with a granular appearance.</p>

<p>{\female} Chalky-white. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing without a discocellular spot, this on hind wing brown and obscure. Hind wing with the tooth at vein 3 twice as long as the tooth on vein 2.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> pale yellow without greenish tinge; small post-discal brown spots prominent towards the apex of fore wing and on the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 55-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral;</span> rare.</p>

<p><b>Gonepteryx mahaguru</b> (Gistel).</p>

<p>The butterfly described by Gistel under this name is identical with <i>zaneka</i> Moore, which, therefore, sinks as a synonym, whilst <i>mahaguru</i> becomes the specific name for all the races previously cited under <i>aspasia</i> M\'en\'etries.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with vein 6 nearer the fork of 7+8 and 9 than to apex of cell; veins 11 and 12 close together; <i>mdc</i> almost straight. Hind wing with outer margin prominently toothed at vein 1 <i>b</i>, between veins 1 <i>b</i> and 2, at vein 2, and with a long tooth at veins 3 and 4.</p>

<p>The characters given above apply only to the Indian races of this species. In general the {\male} has the upperside of fore wing yellow and the hind wing greenish-white; {\female} yellowish white.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x201;The Amur, Ussuri Korea to Japan, Formosa, China Tibet, North Yunnan, <span class="smallcaps">Upper</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma,</span> and <span class="smallcaps">North-West</span> <span class="smallcaps">India.</span> Seven subspecies, including two in the Indian area.</p>

<p>174 <i>a.</i> <b>Gonepteryx mahaguru mahaguru</b> (Gistel).</p>

<p><i>Rhodovera</i> (sic) <i>mahaguru</i>, Gistel, 1857, p. 605 (p. 93 in spearate) (Himalaya).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx mahaguru</i>, Hemming, 1935, p. 121 (=<i>zaneka</i> Moore).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx zaneka</i>, Moore, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 493, pl. xxxi, fig. 18 ({\male}. Simla); Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 136; Butler, 1888 <i>a</i>, p. 199; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 589 (mussooree); Bingham, 1907, p. 230, pl. xviii, fig. 123 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx aspasia zaneka</i>, Verity, 1909-11, pp. 280 359, pl. lxxii, figs. 8, 9 ({\male}{\female}); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 364 (Kumaun, 6,000-10,000 feet); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 77; Peile, 1937, p. 61, pl. vi, fig. 45 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx zaneka zaneka</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161, t. 73 <i>a</i> (imago).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing sulphur-yellow; marginal reddish-brown vein-dots as in <i>rhamni</i> (Linn.), but restricted to the anterior veins; cilia pale yellow, alternated anteriorly with reddish-brown. Hind wing cream-coloured; outer margin posteriorly with reddish-brown vein-dots. Both wings with ferrouginous discocellular spots, much smaller than in <i>rhamni.</i></p>

<p><i>Underside</i> darker cream-colour, with a slightly greenish tint. Fore wing with posterior two-thirds paler, almost white; anterior third from base through middle of cell to margin below apex, and whole surface of hind wing with a delicately roughened appearance.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> cream-coloured, with a slightly yellowish tint.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> greenish-white, otherwise as the {\male}. In both sexes on underside there are some minute black dots; a postdiscal series of them anteriorly on fore wing and across the hind wing indicate the folds. Antenn{\ae}, palpi, head, thorax, and abdomen as in <i>rhamni</i>, but the long hairs on the thorax above silky greenish-white; underside of thorax and abdomen paler than in <i>rhamni.</i></p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 50-55 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon;</span> not rare. According to Peile (1937)  the butterfly is common at Murree, Mussooree and Naini Tal from March to middle of June and in October.</p>

<p>174 <i>b.</i> <b>Gonepteryx mahaguru zanekoided</b> de Nic\'eville.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx zanekoides</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 564, pl. 1. figs. 2 ({\male}), 7 ({\female}) (Upper Burma); South Chin Hills, 7,000 feet).</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx zaneka zanekoides</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 231; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 161.</p>

<p><i>Gonepteryx aspasia zanekoides</i>, Verity, 1909, p. 280; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 77; Peile, 1937, p. 61.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing broader than in the nominotypical rare, the costal margin not constricted at half its length but straight, the apex not so produced. Hind wing distinctly broader than in the nominotypical race, almost the same shade of yellow as the fore wing; distal area slightly paler than the proximal area.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing agrees with the {\male} in shape. Coloration pale yellowish-white.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Upper</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span> <span class="smallcaps">Southern</span> <span class="smallcaps">Chin</span> <span class="smallcaps">Hills</span> rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>GANDACA</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Gandaca</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 33 (type, <i>harina</i> Horsf.); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 172; Klots, 1931, p. 185; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76.</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>G. harina</i> (HOrsfield), from Java.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Wings broad, somewhat rounded, the {\male} without sex. patches. Fore wing cell not quite half the length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell; 7+8 and 9 stalked; 7+8 as long as the distance from end of cell to the fork of 7+8 and 9; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9 at about a quarter the distance from end of cell to apex of wing; <i>mdc</i> at least half as long as <i>ldc.</i> Hind wing with precostal vein rather thin and directed basad; vein 7 from well before the end of the cell; <i>udc</i> and <i>mdc</i> about equal in length, slightly shorter than <i>ldc.</i> Antenna short, club gradual; palpus short, third segment short and oval.</p>

<p>This genus is a monotypical one, and bears a close though superficial resemblance to <i>Eurema.</i> The development of the precostal vein, the position of vein 7 of the hind wing, and the distinctive genitalia combine to render this genus sufficiently distinct from <i>Eurema.</i> The species frequents woods and likes the shade, whilst <i>Eurema</i> is usually found in more open country and likes the sun.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The single species ranges from Hainan, <span class="smallcaps">North-East India</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> to New Guinea. It is never abundant.</p>

<p><b>Gandaca harina</b> (Horsfield, 1829).</p>

<p>{\male}. Both wings pale yellow on both sides. Fore wing with a black marginal border of variable extent. Hind wing unmarked. Antenn{\ae} black, annulated with white; head and thorax dusky greenish; abdomen yellow; underside of palpi dusky black, of thorax and abdomen yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. White to pale yellow, otherwise resembling the {\male}.</p>

<p>The species is said to comprise 17 races, of which four are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>175 <i>a</i>, <b>Gandaca harina assmica</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Gandaca assamica</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 33, pl. 563, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}, wet form), 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form) (Assam, Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Gandaca harina assamica</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 173; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76.</p>

<p><i>Terias harina</i>, Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 370; Elwes, 1888, p. 414; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 307; Watson, 1894, p. 509; Bingham, 1907, p. 249 (part.).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> pale primrose-yellow. Fore wing with narrow apical and marginal black border, not extended below vein 4 or 3.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> paler, without markings.</p>

<p>{\female}. Almost white.</p>

<p>In specimens of the dry-season the black margin is narrower.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 35-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam;</span> not rare.</p>

<p>175 <i>b.</i> <b>Gandaca harina burmana</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Gandaca burmana</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 34, pl. 563, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}, Burma).</p>

<p><i>Gandica</i> (sic) <i>burmana</i>, Adamson, 1908, p. 120.</p>

<p><i>Gandaca harina burmana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 173; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. ix, fig. B 12.1 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias formosa</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> H\dd{u}bn.), 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 836; id., 1886, p. 45 (Mergui); Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville 1887, p. 431 (Burma).</p>

<p><i>Terias harina</i>, Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville (<i>non</i> Horsf.), 1887, p. 370 (Cachar); Watson, 1888, p. 25; id., 1891, p. 51; id., 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 669.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Only differs from <i>assamica</i> in the marginal black border being wider, especially in the {\female}, and reaching vein 3 or inner margin.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma,</span> <span class="smallcaps">Siam,</span> <span class="smallcaps">Annam,</span> and Tong-king; not rare, but less common in Lower Burma.</p>

<p>175 <i>c.</i> <b>Gandaca harina andamana</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Gandaca andamana</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 35, pl. 563, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Gandaca harina andamana</i>, Frustorfer, 1910, p. 173; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76.</p>

<p><i>Terias harina</i>, Wood-mason (<i>non</i> Horsf.), 1880, p. 235; Wood-mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 251.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Differs from <i>burmana</i> in its larger size, the black border being of moderate width.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> not rare.</p>

<p>175 <i>d.</i> <b>Gandaca harina nicobarica</b> Evans.</p>

<p><i>Gandaca harina nicobarica</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 76.</p>

<p>{\male}. Paler than the preceding races, the marginal border reduced.</p>

<p>{\female}. Pale yellow.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Nicobar</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> occurs on all the islands, but is rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>EUREMA</b> H\dd{u}bner.</p>

<p><i>Eurema</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 96; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 135 (type, <i>demoditas</i> H\dd{u}bn., 1819=<i>daira</i> Godart, 1819); id., 1937, p. 152 (has priority over <i>Terias</i> Swains.).</p>

<p><i>Terias</i>, Swainson, 1821, pl. 22 (<i>hecabe</i> Linn.); Doubleday, 1847, p. 76; Wallace, 1867, p. 320; Butler, 1870 <i>a</i>, pp. 34, 44; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 118; Watson, 1894, pp. 508-17; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, pp. 56-82 (revision); Marshall, 1901, pp. 398-403 (dimorphism); Bingham, 1907, p. 244; R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 58; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 165; Klots, 1931, pp. 186, 188; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 64, 77; Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, pp. 143-93, pl. v (revision of Indo-Australian species); Corbet, 1934, pp. 277-9 (revisional notes); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 135 (type, <i>hecabe</i> Linn., 1758); id., 1937, p. 152 (synonym of <i>Eurema</i> H\dd{u}bn.); Peile, 1937, p. 62.</p>

<p><i>Kibreeta</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 36 (type, <i>libythea</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 40 (type, <i>venata</i> Moore).</p>

<p><i>Type</i> of the genus, <i>E. daira</i> (Godt.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with costa arched; apex generally more or less rounded, in a few forms acutely pointed but not produced; outer margin straight; tornus rounded; inner margin bisinuate, very long, about seven-tenths the length of costa; cell not quite half the length of wing; veins 10 and 11 from the cell, the former given off just before upper angle of cell; 7+8 and 9 short, the stalk long; 6 from the stem of 7+8 and 9, nearer the fork of these veins than to end of cell; <i>mdc</i> more than half as long as <i>ldc</i>, both incurved. Hind wing broad, broadly oval or slightly pear-shaped; costa arched; apex and outer margin continuous and strongly curved; tornus obtusely angular, the angle distinct; inner margin broadly arched; cell short, broad at apex; precostal vein absent or very greatly reduced; vein 7 from or from just before end of cell; discocellular veins not oblique; <i>udc</i> very short; <i>mdc</i> less than half as long as <i>ldc;</i> <i>ldc</i> incurved. Antenn{\ae} short, not heavily scaled, club gradual; palpi not very hairy, third segment short. {\male}. or without patches of androconia. One group has on the fore wing underside a narrow elongate brand above and below the basal part of vein 3. Another group has a small patch on the hind wing upperside at the base of vein 7, and a similar patch on the fore wing underside at the base of area 1 <i>b.</i></p>

<p>The species of this genus are small, the fore wing not exceeding about 28 mm. in length. The genus contains a great number of very distinct species which may be assembled into groups on secondary sexual and other characters. Some species closely resemble one another, especially <i>hecabe</i> (Linn.) and <i>blanda</i> Boisd., but the genitalia afford good distinguishing characters. The Indo-Australian species have been the subject of an excellent revision by Corbet and Pendlebury, and their results are largely followed here.</p>

<p>The butterflies are slow fliers. They are found everywhere in the tropics in open places, in gardens and about the edges of woods. They are attracted to wet places and often congregate in swarms.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole Indo-Australian Region, including China and Japan, throughout Africa south of the Sahara, and over the whole of South America and in parts of North America. Ten species are known to inhabit the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key to Groups.</i></p>

<p>1. Underside of both wings without discocellular ring-spots; fore wing without cell-spots. Upperside of fore wing with black border not continued along vein 1 <i>a</i> ... . ....</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Underside of both wings with large discocellular ring-spots. Upperside of fore wing with black border often continued along vein 1 <i>a.</i> {\male} with a median sex-brand on fore wing underside ... ........</p>

<p>[p. 521. <span class="smallcaps">Hecabe</span> Group</p>

<p>2. Fore wing underside with two small black discocellular spots. Upperside of both wings with black borders usually broad, with inner edge regular. {\male} without a sex-brand .. .. ... ...</p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Brigitta</span> Group (<i>Kibreeta</i> Moore), p. 514.</p>

<p>Fore wing underside with a single small discocellular spot. {\male}. with a sex-brand on hind wing upperside at base of area 7, and a similar one on fore wing underside at base of area 1 <i>b</i></p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">L{\ae}ta</span> Group (<i>Nirmula</i> Moore), p. 517.</p>

<p><i>Brigitta</i> Group.</p>

<p>The nominotypical rare of the species from which this group takes its name is confined to Africa. It was found by Corbet (1934) to be conspecific with the forms previously classed with <i>libythea</i> Fabr. Corbet (1933) pointed out that <i>libythea</i> Fabr. was preoccupied by <i>Appias libythea</i> (Fabr.), so, therefore, this name can no longer be used in <i>Eurema,</i> as it is a primary homonym, both having been described originally as <i>Papilio.</i></p>

<p>The group is reresented in the Indo-Australian Region only by the species <i>brigitta</i> (Cramer).</p>

<p><b>Eurema brigitta</b> (Cramer, 1780).</p>

<p>Besidea the characters mentioned in the key, it can be added that the fore wing is more elongate and narrowed towards the apex than in other species of the genus, and the black outer border is well marked and not excavated. The {\male} clasper of this species possesses five hook-like appendages which have the same arrangement in both the Indian and African races.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole {\AE}thiopian and Indo-Australian Regions, extending north to Formosa and South China. A single subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p>176. <b>Eurema brigitta rubella</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 171, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Terias rubella</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 323 (Calcutta); Moore, 1882, p. 253 (N.W. Himalayas); de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b</i>, p. 50; Moore, 1886, p. 45 (Mergui); Elwes, 1888, p. 413; Hampson, 1889, p. 361; Watson, 1894, p. 515; Corbet, 1933, p. 249 (=<i>libythea</i> auct.).</p>

<p><i>Kibreeta rubella</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 38, pl. 564, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}) (wet form), figs. 2 <i>d</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>e</i> ({\female}) (types), figs. 2 <i>f</i> ({\male}), 2 <i>g</i> ({\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias libythea</i> f. <i>rubella</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166 (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Papilio libythea</i>, Fabricius, 1798, p. 427 (Kanara).</p>

<p><i>Terias libythea</i>, Watson, 1894, p. 515; Davidson Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 571; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 58; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 588 (Mussooree, Dehra Dum); Bingham, 1907, p. 247; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166; Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, pp. 385, 425 (Palni Hills); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 364 (Kumaon); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1913, p. 525 (Bombay, early stages); Ormiston, 1924, p. 85, pl. iii, fig. 1 (summer form), fig. 2 (winter form); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 77, pl. ix, fig. B 15.1 ({\male}); Peile, 1937, p. 62, pl. vii, fig. 57 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Kibreeta libythea</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 36, pl. 564, figs. 1 <i>f</i>, <i>g</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Eurema libythea libythea</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 149.</p>

<p><i>Terias drona</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Horsfield), 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 760 (Bengal); Butler, 1871 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 534 (Punjab); Moore 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 120, pl. xlvi, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon); Wood-Mason &amp; Nic\'eville, 1881, p. 236 (Nicobars); Moore, 1882, p. 253 (N.W. Himalayas); Swinhoe 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 135 (Poona); id., 1886, p. 430 (Mhow); Hampson, 1889, p. 361; Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 135.</p>

<p><i>Kibreeta drona</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Horsf.), 1906 <i>b</i>, pp. 36, 37, pl. 564, figs. 1, 1 <i>q-e</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p>The seasonal forms of this race are not so well marked as in some other species of the genus.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> gamboge-yellow. Fore wing with apical third and outer border black, the inner edge of this area more or less regularly incurved from costa to inner margin, and slightly toothed on veins 1 <i>a</i> to 3; basal area dusted with black. Hind wing with a black outer border that is broader anteriorly; basal area dusted with black. Specimens of the wet season have broader black areas than those of the dry season; sometimes in the latter the marginal band of the hind wing is broken into linear spots posteriorly.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of similar ground-colour. Fore wing with costa narrowly edged with pink; two well-marked discocellular spots and some obscure subapical black specks. Hind wing with a spot at the base, followed by three transversely placed spots and an elongate, delicate, loop-like discocellular spot black; above and below the discocellular spot are small diffuse black spots; post-discal short diffuse black bands placed <i>en \'echelon.</i> Both wings black marginal vein-dots; cilia salmon-pink. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen dusky black, the thorax with some yellow hairs; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen whitish-yellow.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but the black marginal borders proportionately broader in both seasonal forms.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 30-40 mm.</p>

<p>The name <b>rubella</b> (Wall.) applies to the dry-season form, and the form of the wet season may not deserve a name.</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Grass-green, with a darker green dorsal line, and on segments 2 to 12 a white spiracular band tinged with yellow. Length, 19 mm.; breadth, 2.6 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Snout short and conical; cremaster square at the end, flat dorsally and slightly thickened at the extreme posterior corners. Body green, with a white spiracular band, a subdorsal and lateral brownish spot on each segment, a large spot in front of the spiracle of segment 7, a group of seven lateral spots in front of the spiracle of segment 2; snout pink and wrinkled. Length, 16 mm.; breadth, 2.7 mm. at shoulders.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly generally on the uppersides of the leaves often on the young folded leaf-buds. The food-plant is <i>Cassia kleinii</i> Wight &amp; Arn., a rather small annual growing in damp places.</p>

<p>The butterfly is very plentiful in dry weather in the hot rocky beds of rivers in Kanara, where the willow-like <i>Homoia</i> grows. It keeps much to the bushes close to the ground; in certain places it congregates amongst the undergrowth. Flight weak and not sustained. Fond of flowers near the ground.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span>, extending to South China; very common.</p>

<p><i>L{\ae}ta</i> Group.</p>

<p>A small group of two or, perhaps, three species confined to the Indo-Australian Region, one species occurring in the Indian area. This species exhibits well-marked seasonal dimorphism, and it is now known that <i>venata</i> Moore, previously considered distinct, is the wet-season form of <i>l{ae}ta</i> Boisduval.</p>

<p><b>Eurema l{\ae}ta</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p>To the characters given in the key it can be added that the apex of the fore wing is more pointed than in other Indian species of the genus, especially in dry-season specimens. Seasonal dimorphism is so strongly marked that the two forms <i>l{\ae}ta</i> and <i>venata</i> werw considered to be distinct species until, in 1931, Colonel Mosse proved them to be conspecific</p>

<p>Both wings in the wet-season form with well-developed black borders, not much indented. In the dry-season form the border on the fore wing does not usually reach the tornus, and on the hind wing it is reduced to apical spots or is absent.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing in both forms with a more or less distinct and more or less complete oblique post-discal diffuse band from apex to inner margin, in dry-season specimens much more distinct and reddish.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, north to China, Japan, and the Amur, south to Hainan, Tong-king, Annam, Java, Philippines, Timor to Kei Islands. Apparently absent from the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, and Borneo. Two subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p>177 <i>a.</i> <b>Eurema l{\ae}ta l{\ae}ta</b> (Boisduval). (Figs. 172 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Terias l{\ae}ta</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 674 (Bengal); Moore, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 493 (Kasauli); Wallace, 1867, p. 320; Butler, 1871 <i>b</i> <i>(b),</i> p. 533; Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 836 (Burma); Butler, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 608 (Belgaum); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 507; id., 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 135; id., 1886, p. 429 (Mhow); id., 1887, p. 274 (Karachi); Aitken, 1887, p. 41 (Bombay); Hamposon, 1889, p. 361; Elwes, 1888, p. 413; Watson, 1894, p. 514; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 571; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 588; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 65; Bingham, 1907, p. 248; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 364 (Kumaon); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 385 (Palni Hills); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1913, p. 524, pl. K, figs. 69 ({\male}), 69 <i>a</i> ({\female}) (early stages); Mosse, 1931, p. 1094 (<i>venata=l{\ae}ta</i>); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula l{\ae}ta</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 44, pl. 566, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-f</i> ({\male}{\female}, wet form), 1 <i>g</i>, <i>h</i>, <i>i</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias l{\ae}ta l{\ae}ta</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166, t. 73 <i>d</i> (imago); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 77; Peile, 1937, p. 62, pl. vii, figs. 54 ({\male}, dry form), 55, 56 ({\male}{\female}, wet form).</p>

<p><i>Eurema l{\ae}ta l{\ae}ta</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 150.</p>

<p><i>Terias venata</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 65, pl. ii <i>a</i>, fig. 2 (imago, N. India); Wallace, 1867, p. 320; Butler, 1871 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 534 (Punjab); Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 135 (Poona, Bombay); id., 1886, p. 430 (Mhow); Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 135; Swinhoe, 1887, p. 275 (Karachi); Watson, 1894, p. 515; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a),</i> p. 64; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville 1898, p. 588(Mussooree); Bingham, 1907, p. 246; Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 385 (Palni Hills); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 364 (Kumaon); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166; Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh); Bell, 1913, p. 523, pl. K, figs. 70, 70 <i>a-c</i> ({\male}{\female}); Mosse &amp; Bell, 1929, p. 727; Mosse, 1931, p. 1094 (=<i>l{\ae}ta</i> Boisd.); Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Klots, 1932, pl. viii, fig. 46 (genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula venata</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 40, pl. 565, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias santana</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865, p. 211 (Bengal).</p>

<p><i>Terias vagans</i>, Wallace &amp; Moore, 1866, p. 357 ({\male}, <i>non</i> {\female}, N. India); Butler, 1871 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, 534 (N. India); id., 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 372 ({\female}, Chuttar).</p>

<p><i>Terias rama</i>, Moore, 1872, p. 566 ({\female}, Ceylon); id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 121, pl. xlvi, figs. 5, 5 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}); Ormiston 1924, pp. 86, 87, pl. iii, figs. 5, 6 ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula rama</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 42, pl. 565, figs. 3 <i>c</i>, <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias venata rama</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166.</p>

<p><i>Eurema l{\ae}ta rama</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 151 (Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Terias cingala</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>b</i>, p. 48 (Ceylon); id., 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 120, pl. xlvi, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula venata</i> f. <i>cingala</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 42, pl. 565, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, wet form).</p>

<p><i>Terias venata</i> f. <i>cingala</i>, Ormiston, 1924, p. 86, pl. iii, figs. 3, 4 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias pallitana</i>, Moore, 1877 <i>b</i>, p. 48 (Bombay).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula pallitana</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 41, pl. 565, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, types).</p>

<p><i>Terias venata</i> f. <i>pallitana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166 (dry form.)</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>venata</b> (Moore) (fig. 172 <i>b</i>).&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> gamboge-yellow. Fore wing apical third black, this colour extended along the costa in a gradually narrowing line to the base; inner edge of black outer border oblique and sinuate from middle of costa to vein 4, thence continued outwards along that vein for a short distance and vertically downwards to vein 2, thence obliquely outwards to the tornal angle; the portion of the area between veins 2 and 4 of even width, slightly produced angularly inwards at veins 2 and 3; basal two-thirds of wing dusted with black, most dense at extreme base; a black linear discocellular speck. Hind wing with an outer even black border; an area of black dusting from base to tornal angle, not spreading on to the disc nor reaching inner margin; a small patch of salmon-coloured androconia at base of area 7. Cilia of both wings pale yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with somewhat duller ground-colour. Both wings evenly but sparsely dusted with black, not extending to the disc, cell, nor dorsal margin of fore wing. Fore wing paler yellow; a patch of salmon-coloured androconia below the median vein in area 2; a linear discocellular speck. Hind wing with a black dot in area 7; two very obscure, parallel, short, blackish post-discal bands. Both wings with marginal black vein-dots. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen dusky black; underside of antenn{\ae} with a line of white dots; palpi, thorax, and abdomen whitish.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the male. Both wings with denser black dusting and broader outer black borders; on fore wing the border narrowed generally abruptly below the muddle of area 1 <i>b</i>, and continued thence to tornal angle as a mere line; on hind wing very broad anteriorly and attenuated rapidly towards the tornus.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p>The names <i>santana</i> C. &amp; R. Feld., <i>vagans</i> Wall. &amp; Moore, <i>rama</i> Moore, and <i>cingala</i> Moore are synonyms of <i>venata.</i></p>

<p><i>Dry-season from</i> <b>l{\ae}ta</b> (Boisd.) (fig. 172 <i>a</i>).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Fore wing much more pointed at apex outer margin sharply cut and straight. <i>Upperside</i> a richer brighter yellow. Fore wing with basal half of costa broadly dusted with black; outer black border stopping abruptly at vein 2; the tornus, except for a very fine black anticiliary line, yellow. Hind wing with black border reduced to a black subapical patch and posteriorly to a series of black spots, or latter or all these markings absent</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of both wings with pale yellow ground-colour. Fore wing with apical area and basal half of costa dusted with fleshy pink and brownish scales. Hind wing densely shaded with fleshy pink and brownish; two post-discal, somewhat diffuse, straight, ferruginous-brown bars, the inner one the longer; above these bars are a few brown, somewhat obscure specks and dots on upper basal part of wing. Antenn{\ae} mealy yellow, with scattered dusky scales; head with pinkish pubescence; thorax and abdomen black, with scattered yellow hairs and scales; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen pale yellowish-white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i> {\male}{\female}, 30-40 mm.</p>

<p>Various transitional form occur between the extreme wet and dry forms.</p>

<p>Colonel Mosse (1931) succeeded in breeding both forms from a single batch of eggs laid by a <i>venata</i> {\female}. The seven specimens studied included two <i>venata</i> (one of the typical dusky type, the other approximating to <i>l{\ae}ta</i>) and five <i>l{\ae}ta</i> (two with hind wing underside yellow, two with hind wing underside brownish-buff, one with hind wing underside creamy-buff, the commonest form).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Wet-season from.</i>&#x2014;Not rare in the Bombay presidency in the drier parts. It is common round Belgaum, in Dharwar, Bijapur sholapur, and Poona in grass-lands. Always keeps close to the ground and hardly ever flies far witout settling. Flight weak and fluttering. Fond of flowers, which the male seeks amongst the grass, generally on the very surface of the ground.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form.</i>&#x2014;Flight weak but not fluttering. Fond of resting on dead grass-stems and blads; the pinkish yellow colour of the underside blends very well with the withered surroundings. In Kanara it appears about October, about the end of the monsoon, and is quite common from November to June. It is more abundant than <i>venata.</i></p>

<p>It should be mentioned that Bell strongly suspected <i>venata</i> to bethe wet form of <i>l{\ae}ta.</i></p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Layas;</span> very common.</p>

<p>177 <i>b.</i> <b>Eurema l{\ae}ta sikkima</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Nirmula sikkima</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 43, pl. 565, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, Sikkim, Bhutan).</p>

<p><i>Terias venata sikkimica</i> (sic), Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166.</p>

<p><i>Eurema l{\ae}a sikkima</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 151.</p>

<p><i>Terias l{\ae}ta sikkima</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 77.</p>

<p><i>Terias pseudol{\ae}ta</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 44, pl. 566, figs. 1 <i>j-m</i> ({\male}, Mergui).</p>

<p><i>Terias l{\ae}ta</i> f. <i>pseudol{\ae}ta</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166 (dry form).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A larger race than the preceding. In the male type the distal border on fore wing does not reach the inner margin, but in the female type it extends to the tornus.</p>

<p>The dry-season form is <b>pseudol{\ae}ta</b> Moore. It differs from <i>l{\ae}ta l{\ae}ta</i> in the less pointed apex of fore wing and less reddish colouring of the underside.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 35-45 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma;</span>
very common, Also in Hainan, Tong-king, Annam, Siam, and Java.</p>

<p>Hecabe Group. (Fig. 173, genitalia).</p>

<p>The males of this group may be recognized by the narrow grey sex-brand placed on either side of the median vein, on the fore wing underside, form the base to the origin of vein 2. Fore wing in both sexes with outer black border continued to the tornus and except in dry-season forms, excavated between veins 2 and 4. The group contains eight species inhabiting the Indian area.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Key to Species.</i></p>

<p>1. Fore wing upperside with black border continued along inner margin to base. . .</p>

<p>[p. 539. <i>tilaha</i> (Horsf.),</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with black border not continued along inner margin to base. ..</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Fore wing underside with 3 spots in the cell. Hind wing underside usually with a spot at base of area 7; marginal dots between the veins usually present. Dry form with rusty spots on underside . .....</p>

<p>[p. 522. <i>blanda</i> (Boisd.),</p>

<p>Fore wing underside with 2 spots in cell, but one or even both may be absent. Dry form with rusty spots on underside . .. ..</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>Fore wing underside with a single zigzag spot in the cell, and a spot towards the tornus in area 1 <i>b.</i> Underside not speckled with black, never with rusty spots. . ...</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>3. Hind wing underside with a transverse streak in area 7 in line with the discocellular spot. {\male} sex-brand not reaching to origin of vein 3.</p>

<p>[p. 537. <i>ada</i> (Dist. &amp; Pryer)</p>

<p>Hind wing underside without a transverse streak in area 7. {\male} sex-brand reaches to origin of vein 3 ... ... .. .</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>4. Fore wing underside with apical area not entirely brown. {\male} sex-brand broad and prominent .. .. ... . ...</p>

<p>[p. 526. <i>hecabe</i> (Linn.),</p>

<p>Fore wing underside with a large, cleft, reddish-brown apical spot. Hind wing underside with a figure-of-eight spot at the base of area 1 <i>c</i> .. ... .. ... .</p>

<p>[p. 533. <i>simulatrix</i> (Stgr.).</p>

<p>5. Fore wing upperside with black border continued along half the inner margin narrowing proximally .. ... .. ..</p>

<p>[p. 534. <i>jordani</i> C. &amp; p.,</p>

<p>Fore wing upperside with black border not continued along inner margin .  .</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>6. Fore wing underside with apex never entirely dark. .. ... ... .. . .</p>

<p>[p. 532. <i>andersoni</i> (Moore),</p>

<p>Fore wing underside with apex entirely and broadly dark chocolate</p>

<p><i>sari</i> (Horsf), p. 538.</p>

<p><b>Eurema blanda</b> (Boisduval), 1836.</p>

<p>The species is sufficiently characterized in the key. The female is often extremely like <i>hecabe</i> (Linn.), female, in having a broad, deeply excavated margin on the fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 173 (3)) (Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 153, fig. 3).&#x2014;Valve posteriorly with four appendages, of which three are simple, rather slender, slightly curved, spine-like processes, whilst the fourth is broad, flat, and larger than the others. A fifth simple appendage is situated in the interior of the valve as in <i>hecabe</i> and <i>simulatrix.</i></p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> (as observed in <i>E. blanda davidsoni</i> (Moore), from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Very similar to that of <i>hecabe</i>, but is always found in companies of many individuals. Body dorsally of a dark blush-green, with a pale yellowish-green, often somewhat indistinct, spiracular line; venter yellow-green. When not quit full-grown the colour is greenish-yellow over. Length, 26 mm.; breadth up 3 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Resemble that of <i>hecabe</i>, but is dark yellowish green brown with top of snout yellow; snout sharply pointed and often slightly upturned at the end. The pip{\ae} are almost invariably found strung up in companies, one behind the other, along the underside of a twing or midrib of a leaf.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid on the upperside of a leaf or young shoot in clusters of 20 or 30 each. The lar{\ae} are gregarious and much subject to the attack of hymenopterous parasites. The food-plant is <i>Wagatea spicate</i> Dalz. (family Leguminos{\ae}), a large climber with long spikes of orange and red flowers, a striking object in the jungle-landscape of the Bombay Western Ghats. The larva also feeds upon some species of <i>Cassia</i> and upon <i>Delonix (Poinciana) regia</i> Raf., the gold-mohur tree. The butterfly flies high up round trees.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon,</span> <span class="smallcaps">India,</span> <span class="smallcaps">Burma,</span> <span class="smallcaps">Andaman</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands,</span> <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands</span> to South China and Formosa, south to New Guinea and the Bismarck Islands. Six subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>178 <i>a</i>, <b>Eurema blanda silhetana</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 174 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, <i>c</i>, {\male}; fig. 175, {\male}.)</p>

<p><i>Terias silhetana</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 324 ({\male}, Silhet); Butler 1871 <i>b</i> <i>(b)</i>, p. 536; Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 836 (Burma); id., 1886, p. 45 (Mergui); Watson, 1894, p. 509, pl. ii, figs. 8-16 ({\male}{\female}); Davidson, Bell. &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, pl. 571, pl. vi, figs. 6, 6 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i>(a), p. 71; Bingham, 1907, p. 257, fig. 65 ({\male}); Evans, 1910 <i>a</i>, p. 385 (Palni Hilla); Manders, 1910, p. 245; de Rh\'e-Phillipe, 1911, p. 767 (Bhutan); Bell, 1913, p. 530; Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg).</p>

<p><i>Terias blanda silhetana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 169, t. 73 <i>c</i> (imago); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 78; Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 172 <i>(Eurema)</i>; Peile, 1937, p. 63.</p>

<p><i>Terias citrina</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 119, pl. xlv, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i> ({\female}, Ceylon); id., 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 65, pl. 571, figs. 1 ({\male}, wet form), 1 <i>a</i>, ({\female}, intermed form), 1 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\female}, dry form), <i>d</i> ({\female}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias rotundalis</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 120, pl. xlvi, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male} only, Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Terias uniformis</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 120, pl. xlvi, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Terias silhetana</i> f. <i>uniformis</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 258, fig. 66 <i>b</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Terias heliophila</i>, Butler, 1885, p. 338, pl. viii, fig 2 (imago).</p>

<p><i>Terias silhetana</i> f. <i>heliophila</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 258, fig. 65 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias templetoni</i>, Butler, 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 218 (Ceylon).</p>

<p><i>Terias davidsoni</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>a</i>, p. 63, pl. 570, figs 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}, types, wet form), 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}, intermed. form), <i>d</i>, <i>e</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form), <i>f</i>, <i>g</i> ({\male}{\female}, extreme dry form) (Karwar).</p>

<p><i>Terias grandis</i>, Moore, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 67 (Khasi Hills).</p>

<p><i>Terias roepstorffi</i>, Moore, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. 575, fig. 3 ({\male}, Andamans).</p>

<p><i>Terias cadelli</i>, Moore, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 77, pl. 575, fig. 4 ({\male}, Andamans).</p>

<p><i>It will be seen that this race of <i>blanda</i> has received many names, indicating its great variability. I am unable to find any constant characters for retaining any of these names, but the following summary may be useful to those who wish to investigate the variation:&#x2014;</i></p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><b>E. b. rotundalis</b> (Moore) (fig. 175) applies to the dry-season form Ceylon, of which <i>uniformis</i> (Moore), <i>templetoni</i> (Butler), and <i>citrina</i> (Moore) are wet forms.</p>

<p><b>E. b. davidsoni</b> (Moore) applies to the wet form in Peninsular India.</p>

<p><b>E. b. heliophila</b> (Butler) (fig. 174 <i>c</i>) applies to the wet form from the area Sikkim-Assam-Burma, <i>grandis</i> (Moore) being an extreme wet form from Assam with very broad borders.</p>

<p><b>E. b. roepstorffi</b> (Moore) applies to the dry form in the Andamans, <i>cadelli</i> (Moore) being the wet form.</p>

<p>The oldest name for the wet-season form appears to be <b>uniformis</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> rich citron-yellow. Fore wing with black outer border rather broad in the apical area, narrowing posteriorly and strongly excavated below vein 4, resembling <i>hecabe</i> (Linn.). Hind wing with a marginal narrow black line which may be interrupted, or increased to a narrow band.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with slightly paler ground-colour. Markings much as in dry-season specimens of <i>hecabe</i>, but fore wing always with an additional minute reddish-brown dot at extreme base of cell, and in all typical specimens the apical reddish-brown patch is much large and spreads diffusely outwards to the margin.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>uniformis</b> (Moore).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with broader black border. Hind wing with a narrow black border, wider in the {\female}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings more distinctly defined than in the dry form.</p>

<p>The extreme wet form of {\female} has very broad borders on both wings, and the fore wing has a prominent discocellular mark. Hind wing with a diffuse but strongly dentate edge to the black border. A specimen in the British Museum from Travancore has white ground-colour, only the anterior half of hind wing being yellow.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 40-50 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, and the <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands;</span> common.</p>

<p>178 <i>b.</i> <b>Eurema blanda moorei</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><i>Terias moorei</i>, Butler, 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 216, pl. v, fig. 1 (imago) (Nico-bars: Camorta); id., 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 72; Bingham, 1907, p. 259 (part.); Moore, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 77, pl. 575, fig. 5 ({\male}); Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 169.</p>

<p><i>Eurema blanda moorei</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 173; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 78 (Terias).</p>

<p><i>Terias roepstorffi</i>, Moore, {\female}, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. 575, fig. 3 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias cadelli</i>, Moore, {\female}, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 76, pl. 575, fig. 4 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> rich deep sulphur-yellow. Fore wing elongate and narrower than in <i>E. b. silhetana</i> (Wall.); apex and outer margin with a narrow, black, inwardly dentate border that broadens slightly on the apex and is continued as a slender line along costal margin to base, close to which it becomes somewhat diffuse and dusky; the border is broader in specimens from Car Nicobar. Hind wing with indications of a slender marginal black anticiliary line, which in most specimens is reduced to a series of marginal black vein-dots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with similar ground-colour, the markings very similar to those in the wet-season form of <i>silhetana.</i></p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Car Nicobar</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Central</span> <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> rare.</p>

<p>178 <i>c.</i> <b>Eurema blanda grisea</b> (Evans). (Fig. 176, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Terias blanda grisea</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 78 (South Nicobars); Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 173 <i>(Eurema).</i></p>

<p><i>Terias moorei</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Butl.), 1907, p. 259 (part.), fig. 67 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the black border narrower than in <i>moorei</i>, and scaled with grey between the veins. The border is much wider in the {\female}.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South</span> <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar</span> <span class="smallcaps">Islands;</span> not rare.</p>

<p><b>Eurema hecabe</b> (Linn{\ae}us, 1758).</p>

<p>This widely distributed species is the most variable <i>Eurema</i> in the Indo-Australian Region, and many names have been bestowed upon its variations. Transitional forms are so common that most of these names represent no constant form, and cannot properly be recognized now.</p>

<p>Normally the species has two cell-spots on the fore wing underside, but examples with no cee-spots are not uncommon; specimens with a single cell-spot or with three cell-spots are rare. The male can be easily separated from its congeners by the sex-brand on the fore wing underside; this is absent but rarely. The {\female} resembles the {\male}, but a white form of this sex occasionally occurs.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 173 (1)) (Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 152, text-fig. 1).&#x2014;Valve with five rather long, slender, slightly curved, spine-like appendages. The anterior one, situated in the centre of the valve, is not always prominent.</p>

<p><i>Early stages and habits</i> (as observed in <i>simulata</i> (Moore), from <i>Bell</i>, 1913):&#x2014;</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Spindle-shape, the top bluntly pointed; many very fine longitudinal ribs, and many fine transverse stri{\ae}. White when laid, quickly becomeing yellow.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Dark green, mostly glaucous on the sides, with a spiracular narrow white band from head to end of anal flap. Length 22 mm.; breadth, 3 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Like that of <i>E. libythea rubella</i> (Wall.). Snout conical, not long, rather sharply pointed. Cremaster rather longer than broad, strong, trapeze-shaped, the nearly square extremity, as well as the adjacent ventral surface, set with short suspensory hooklets. Usually green, with a rather dark violet-grey dorsal line; dorsal margin of wing also violet-grey, this colour continued along abdomen above spiracles; a faint white spiracular line; the line of suture of wings near abdominal end dark. Some pup{\ae} are much marked with smoky grey, especially on the wings Length, 17 mm.; breadth 3.5 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habita.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly on young shoots and leaves. Larva feeds upon Leguminos{\ae}: <i>cassia, Wagatea, Acacia, Serbania, C{\ae}salpinia, Albizzia</i>, etc.</p>

<p>The butterfly is a stronger flier than the others and keeps on the wing for some time, often ascending high in the air It comes freely to flowers, and frequents damp places in the hot months, being equally abundant in the shady extensive forests of the hills and in the open hot plains.</p>

<p>According to Manders (1910)the food-plant in Ceylon is usually the ``Madras Thorn,'' <i>Pithecelobium dulce</i> Benth.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The whole {\AE}thiopian Region and the whole Indo-Australian Region, northwards to Korea and Japan. Five subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>179 <i>a.</i> <b>Eurema hecabe contubernalis</b> (Moore). (Fig 177 <i>a-e</i>, {\male}{\female}.)</p>

<p><i>Terias contubernalis</i>, Moore, 1886, p. 46 (Mergui); id., 1906 <i>b</i>, pp. 51, 52, pl. 567, figs 1 <i>h</i>, <i>i</i> (types, {\male}{\female}) (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> f. <i>contubernalis</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253 (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i>, Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 63, pl. 1, figs. 11, 11 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa); id., 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 760 (Bengal); Butler, 1870 <i>b</i>, p. 727 (Gujerat); Moore 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 836 (Burma); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 236; id., 1887, p. 370 (Cachar); Elwes, 1888, pp. 412, 413 (variation); Watson, 1894, pp. 508-14, pl. ii, fig. 12 (imago); Watson, 1896, p. 283; Davidson, Bell, &amp; Aitken, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 570, pl. vi, figs. 5, 5 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a),</i> p. 69; de Nic\'eville, 1899 <i>c</i>, p. 212; id., 1902 <i>a</i>, p. 26; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 50, pl. 567, figs 1, 1 <i>a-e</i> ({\male}{\female}, wet form), figs <i>h</i>, <i>i</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form); R\dd{o}ber, 1907, p. 59, t. 23 <i>f</i> (imago); Bingham, 1907, p. 250, pl. xvi, fig. 106 ({\male}); Manders, 1910, p. 245; Klots, 1932, pl. viii, fig. 47 (genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe hecabe</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 166, t. 73 <i>f</i> (imago); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 78; Peile, 1937, p. 64, pl. vii, fig 51 ({\male}), 52 ({\female}, dry form), 53 ({\female}, wet form).</p>

<p><i>Eurema hecabe hecabe</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, pp. 144, 145. 152, 153, text-fig. 1 (genitalia), pl. v. figs. 1, 2 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>?Papilio rahel</i>, Fabricius, 1787, p. 22.</p>

<p><i>? terias hecabeoides</i>, M\'en\'etries, 1855, p. 85, pl. ii, fig. 2 ({\male}, ``Haiti'').</p>

<p><i>?Terias {\ae}siope</i>, M\'en\'etries, 1855, p. 85, pl. ii, fig. 3 ({\female}, ``Haiti'').</p>

<p><i>Terias patruelis</i>, Moore, 1886, p. 46, pl. iv, fig. 5 ({\male}, Mergui); id., 1907, pl 73, pl. 574, figs. 2 ({\male}, wet form), 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\female}, dry form), 2 <i>c</i> ({\male}, intermed. dry form), 2 <i>d</i> ({\male}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> var. <i>patruelis</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253, fig. 62 <i>c</i> ({\male}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias fraterna</i>, Moore, 1886, p. 46, pl. iv, fig. 6 ({\male}, Mergui) (dry form); id., 1907, p. 72, pl. 574, figs. 1 ({\male}, wet form 1), <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias merguiana</i>, Moore, 1886, p. 47, pl. iv, flg. 7 ({\male}, Mergui); id., 1907, p. 71, pl. 573, fig. 3 ({\male}, wet form), 3 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form), <i>c</i> <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> var. <i>merguiana</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253, fig. 62 <i>a</i> ({\female}, wet form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe merguiana</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167.</p>

<p><i>Terias kana</i>, Moore, 1886, p. 48, pl. iv, fig. 9 ({\male}, Mergui); id., 1907, p. 69, pl. 573, figs. 1 <i>b</i>, <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> var. <i>kana</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253, fig. 61 ({\female}) (wet form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe grandis</i> f. <i>sarinoides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167 (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias lacteola</i>, Distant, 1886, p. 466, fig. 129 ({\female}, Singaporo).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> {\female} f. <i>lacteola</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, pp. 145, 155, 157, pl. v, fig. 4 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Wetseason form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> yellow, variable in tint from sulphur- to rich lemon-yellow according to locality, with a light or heavy rainfall. Fore wing with a deep black outer border, continued narrowly along costal margin to base; inner edge of the border from costa to vein 4 very oblique and irregular, excavated between vein 2 and 4, this excavation outwardly rounded between the veins, and inwardly toothed on vein 3; below vein 2 the black area is suddenly dilated into a square spot which occupies the whole of the tornal angle; the inner edge of this projection is normally slightly incurved. Hind wing with an outer narrow black border which is attenuated anteriorly and posteriorly; thisborder varies in width, and its inner edge is sinuate; inner margin broadly paler than the ground-colour.</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> ground-colour usually paler than that of the upperside, with the following reddish-brown markings:&#x2014; Fore wing two small spots or specks in basal half of cell, and a reniform discocellular spot or ring. A sex-brand on both sides of the median vein, extending from the base of wing to the origin of vein 2; this brand is broader than in any other Indian species of the <i>hecabe</i>-group. Hind wing with a slightly curved subbasal series of three small spots; a discocellular, slender, irregular ring or spot; a post-discal series of highly irregular curved streaks, some or all of which are often obsolescent; the streak in area 7 is out of line with the others and directed to mid-way between these and the discocellular spot. Both wings with minute reddish-brown costal and outer marginal vein-specks. Antenn{\ae} greyish-yellow, club black; head, thorax, and abdomen yellow, shaded with fuscous; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen yellowish-white.</p>

<p>{\female}. Black marginal borders slightly broader, the inner edge of the band on hind wing often diffuse. <i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p>The form <b>lacteola</b> (Dist.) is white.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season form.</i>&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> very similar to wet-season specimens, the hind wing border sometimes narrower and diffuse inwardly.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to that of the wet-season form, but the spots larger, more clearly defined darker, and therefore far more conspicuous; often with greater or less black dusting. Fore wing with a subapical, very prominent, elongate spot or short bar of reddish-brown extended downwards from the costa; this spot is irregular in shape and of variable also a small reddish-brown spot in area 1 <i>b</i> near the tornus.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 40-50 mm.</p>

<p>The nominotypical <i>hecabe</i> Linn{\ae}us is restricted to the Philippine Islands (Luzon), and is represented by the figure in Petiver, 1702-11, `Gazophylacii natur{\ae},' Pl. 28, fig. 9. This insect is in the Petiver Collection in the british Museum.</p>

<p><i>Papilio rahel</i> Fabricius may belong to <i>hecabe</i>, but the type is not known, and the description is quite insufficient to make identity certain.</p>

<p>The names <i>hecabeoides</i> M\'en\'etries and <i>{\ae}siope</i> M\'en\'etries. apply to <i>hecabe</i> forms, but they do not appear typical of Indian and came probably from China.</p>

<p>Owing to the uncertainty as to what insects the names given above really represent, it is considered that <i>contubernalis</i> (Moore) should be taken as being the oldest name for the subspecies in North-East India and Burma. It represents the dry-season form.</p>

<p>The name for the wet-season form can be taken as <b>merguiana</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Bengal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Burma</span>, and the Malay Peninsula; very common. The {\female} form <i>lacteola</i> is very rare in India.</p>

<p>179 <i>b.</i> <b>Eurema hecabe simulata</b> (Moore). (Fig. 178 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i>, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Terias simulata</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 119, pl. xlv, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon); Rothney, 1882, p. 35 (Barrackpore); Watson, 1894, p. 510; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 70.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> f. <i>simulata</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253 (dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe simulata</i>, Fruhstirfer, 1910, p. 167; Yates, 1931, p. 1007 (Coorg); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 78 (Ceylon and South India); Peile, 1937, p. 63.</p>

<p><i>Eurema hecabe simulata</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 160.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabeoides</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> M\'en\'etr.), 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 119, pl. xlv, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, Ceylon); Butler, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 608 ({\female}, Karachi); Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 508 ({\male}{\female}, Karachi); id., 1886, p. 430 (Mhow).</p>

<p><i>Terias {\ae}siope</i>, Butler, (<i>non</i> M\'en\'etr.), 1883, p. 150 (Mhow); Forsayeth, 1884, p. 385, pl. xiv, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> (larva and pupa, Mhow).</p>

<p><i>Terias asphodelus</i>, Butler, 1883, p. 151, pl. xxiv, fig. 13 ({\male}, Mhow; {\female}, Depalpur); Swinhoe, 1884, <i>b</i>, p. 508 (Karachi); id., 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 136 (Poona); id., 1886, p. 430 (Mhow); id., 1887, p. 275 (Karachi); Watson, 1894, p. 510; Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 71; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 62, pl. 569, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}, wet form), 3 <i>b</i> ({\male}, dry form), 3 <i>c</i> ({\female}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> f. <i>asphodelus</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253, fig. 62 <i>b</i> (\female).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe fimbriata</i> f. <i>asphodelus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167 (intermed. form).</p>

<p><i>Terias narcissua</i>, Butler, 1883, p. 151 (dry var., Mhow); Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 136 (Poona); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 71; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 62, pl. 569, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe fimbriata</i> f. <i>narcissus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167 (intermed. form).</p>

<p><i>Terias curiosa</i>, Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b</i>, p. 508, pl. xlvii, fig. 3 (imago, Karachi); id., 1887, p. 275 (Karachi); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 73.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> ab. <i>curiosa</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, pp. 51, 52, pl. 567, fig. 2 (imago).</p>

<p><i>Terias sari</i> ab. <i>curiosus</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 256; Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 170.</p>

<p><i>Terias swinhoei</i>, Butler, 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 216 (Bombay); id., 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 71; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, 61, pl. 569, fig. 2 ({\male}, wet form), 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form), 2 <i>c</i> ({\female}, extreme dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe swinhoei</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167.</p>

<p><i>Terias suava</i>, Butler (<i>non</i> Boisd.), 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 371 (Campbellpore).</p>

<p><i>Terias {\ae}siopioides</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 60, pl. 569, figs. 1 ({\male}, wet form), 1 <i>a, b, c, d</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form) (Karachi).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe {\ae}siopioides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Not shaply differentiated. A smaller race. with the ground-colour darker yellow than in the nominotypical race.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with a prominent brown subapical patch from the costa; hind wing markings more or less reddish-brown. In the more extreme wet forms these brown markings are absent; such specimens do not differ from <i>contubernalis</i> (Moore).</p>

<p>figure</p>

<p>The dry-season form may be called <b>asphodelus</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> with slightly narrower borders, in extreme forms. much narrower.</p>

<p><i>Expanse:</i>{\male}{\female}, 40-50 mm.</p>

<p>Dr. A. S Corbet tells me that he saw in the Colombo Museum a gynandromorph from Ceylon in which the {\female} side was of the pale <i>lacteola</i> form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>, <span class="smallcaps">Peninsular</span> <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, and <span class="smallcaps">Central Provinces;</span> very common.</p>

<p>179 <i>c.</i> <b>Eurema hecabe fimbriata</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 179 <i>a, b</i>, ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Terias fimbriata</i>, Wallace, 1867, p. 323 ({\male}, Mussooree); Moore, 1882, p. 253 (N. W. Himalayas); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 71.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> f. <i>fimbriata</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe fimbriata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 78, pl. ix, fig. B 15.5 ({\male}, underside); Peile, 1937, p. 63.</p>

<p><i>Eurema hecabe fimbriata</i>, Corbet &amp; Pendlebury, 1932, p. 160.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i>, Moore (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1874 <i>a</i>, p. 273 (Cashmere); id., 1882, p. 252 (N.W. Himalayas); Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 586; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 364 (Kumaon); Peile, 1911, p. 874 (Fatehgarh).</p>

<p><i>Terias excavata</i>, Moore, 1882, p. 252 (Kangra); Butler, 1989 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 70; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, pl. 568, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 3 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> var. <i>merguiana</i> f. <i>excavata</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253.</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe fimbriata</i> f. <i>excavata</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1910, p. 167 (wet form).</p>

<p><i>Terias purrea</i>, Moore, 1882, p. 252 ({\male}, Kangra); Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 70; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 56, pl. 568, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}) 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}) (wet form), 2, 2 <i>a</i>, <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, dry form).</p>

<p><i>Terias hecabe</i> var. <i>purrea</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 253.</p>

<p><i>Terias apicalis</i>, Moore, 1882, p. 253, pl. xii, fig. 2 (imago, Kangra);Butler, 1898 <i>b</i> <i>(a)</i>, p. 71; Moore, 1906 <i>b</i>, p. 59.</p>






</body>
</html>
