<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
	<title>Butterflies</title>
	<link href="style.css" media="screen" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>
	
<p class="chap-title">Author's Preface</p>

<p>
<span class="smallcaps">The</span> study of butterflies, even of Indian species, has progressed largely during the thirty years or so which have elapsed since the publication of Bingham's work in this series. During the past ten years it was felt that a revision of Bingham was necessary, even though the work of Evans, in 1932, helped to fill the gap to a great extent.
</p>

<p>
Much new knowledge of the subject has been acquired since 1907, and the work of co-ordinating this has involved the almost entire re-writing of Bingham's work, though many of the original descriptions have been used.
</p>

<p>
In recent years a study of the works of the older naturalists has resulted in new ideas on the subject of nomenclature; and in consequence a number of names hitherto well known to students have had to be changed. In accordance, too, with the increase in our knowledge of the various groups, it will be found that the classification differs in some respects from that adopted in most works hitherto. On the other hand, the arrangement of species is much the same as that adopted by Evans, already an advance upon older systems.
</p>

<p>
All available information upon the habits and life-history of the species has been incorporated in the volume. The early stages of many species still remain unknown, and much information of other kinds is still lacking. For example, the exact limits of distribution of many forms still remains to be worked out, as well as the extent to which subspecies overlap and the nature of various individual forms. There is much confusion in the genus <i>Parnassius</i>, and this is unlikely to be cleared up until more intensive collecting can be done in the higher Himalayan valleys, and adequate data obtained. It is not enough to have the name of a locality and the month of capture : it is also important to know what forms actually fly on the same ground. Our knowledge of geographical races is, in many cases, still inadequate. It has thus been impossible in this volume to give full details of distribution : a species which may be regarded as rare over a certain area may yet be quite common in a few restricted places.
</p>

<p>
The Introduction to this volume has been considerably extended to cover the entire range of the subject. No similar account is to be found in any single entomological text-book, and only in the work of Evans (1932) was the subject treated at all fully. This latter work has served as a basis for the present Introduction.
</p>

<p>
The illustrations are from a variety of sources. Those used in Bingham's work have been, for the most part, used again, and a few errors have been corrected. Owing to the large number of figures in the text&#x2014;in the opinion of the author a very desirable feature&#x2014;the number of coloured plates has had to be curtailed. Plates I and II are from drawings generously presented by T. R. Bell, Esq., C.I.E., and Plate III is reproduced from Bingham.
</p>

<p>
Text-figures were taken from the following sources (full titles of the papers concerned will be found in the Bibliography):&#x2014;
</p>

<p>
<i>Specimens in the British Museum</i>, drawn by Miss D. Fitchew.&#x2014;Figs. 7, 29 a, 33, 34, 35, 42, 47, 48, 111, 117, 119, 121, 122, 124, 125, 127, 129, 137, 139, 145, 146, 147, 150, 155, 158, 161, 166, 171, 172, 180, 184.
</p>

<p>
<i>Avinoff</i> (1916).&#x2014;Figs. 78, 80, 81, 86, 86 a, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94, 95, 101, 104.
</p>

<p>
<i>Bang-Haas</i> (1927).&#x2014;Figs. 76, 77, 84, 99, 103, 105.
</p>

<p>
<i>Bell</i> (1909).&#x2014;Figs. 1, 157, 160, 162, 164.
</p>

<p>
<i>Corbet and Pendlebury</i> (1932).&#x2014;Fig. 173.
</p>

<p>
<i>Gosse</i> (1883).&#x2014;Figs. 11, 12 <i>d</i>, <i>e</i>, 13, 14, 16, 19 <i>c</i>, 30, 31, 37 <i>b, c, d</i>, 38 <i>b, c</i>, 39, 43, 45, 49, 51, 61, 62, 63.
</p>

<p>
<i>Jordan</i> (1928).&#x2014;Figs. 18, 20, 21, 22 <i>b-e</i>, 23, 24, 25, 116, 118, 120, 123, 126 <i>a, b</i>.
</p>

<p>
<i>Talbot</i> (1929-1937).&#x2014;Figs. 6, 114, 115, 124 <i>a</i>, 126 <i>c</i>, 128, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tytler</i> (1926).&#x2014;Figs. 72, 73, 74, 79, 82, 85, 98.
</p>

<p>
<i>Verity</i> (`Rhopalocera Palæarctica').&#x2014;Figs. 71, 75, 83, 88, 93, 96, 97, 102, 106, 107.
</p>

<p>
The structural fig. 8 was drawn by Mr. N. Bennett from specimens dissected by him.
</p>

<p>
Acknowledgements are tendered to the following for kind permission to reproduce figures :&#x2014;
</p>

<p>
The Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History) for the load of specimens, and some original drawings from Part VI of Talbot's `Monograph of <i>Delias</i>.'
</p>

<p>
The Linnean Society of London, in respect of Gosse's paper.
</p>

<p>
The Royal Entomological Society of London, in respect of Dr. Avinoff's paper.
</p>

<p>
The Bombay Natural History Society, in respect of the figures from Bell and Tytler.
</p>

<p>
The Raffles Museum, Singapore, and H.M. Pendlebury, Esq., for the loan of the blocks for fig. 173.
</p>

<p>
Dr. K. Jordan, F.R.S., Herr O. Bang-Haas, and Dr. R. Verity.
</p>

<p>
I have pleasure in acknowledging the very kind and ready help received from Brigadier W. H. Evans, C.S.I., C.I.E., D.S.O., etc., and from the Authorities of the British Museum (Natural History). Without help from these sources the book could scarcely have been written. Permission to make free use of his work on `The Identification of Indian Butterflies' was accorded by Brigadier Evans, who also prepared the Table of Faunistic Areas given in the Introduction.
</p>

<p>
In the work of preparing the Introduction I am especially grateful to Dr. B. M. Hobby, M.A., D.Phil., F.R.E.S., for kindly reading through the manuscript and making most helpful suggestions. In this connection, too, I desire to thank N. D. Riley, Esq., F.R.E.S., Dr. A. S. Corbet, D.Sc., Ph.D., F.I.C., F.R.E.S., and Brigadier Evans.
</p>

<p>
Finally, I should like to thank the editor, Lieut.-Colonel R. B. Seymour Sewell, C.I.E., Sc.D., F.R.S., for his kindly co-operation, and the printers for their very careful reading of the proofs.
</p>

<p>
5th December, 1938. <span class="author">G. TALBOT.</span>
</p>

<p class="chap-title">GLOSSARY</p>

<p>
<i>Aberration.</i>&#x2014;A form that departs in some striking way from the normal type, occurring either singly or, rarely, at irregular intervals.
</p>

<p>
<i>Adnervular.</i>&#x2014;Placed against a vein of the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Ædeagus.</i>&#x2014;The sclerotized outer sheath of the penis.
</p>

<p>
<i>Æstival.</i>&#x2014;Occurring in summer.
</p>

<p>
<i>Allotype.</i>&#x2014;When a specimen of either sex is chosen as the holotype, a specimen chosen to represent the opposite sex becomes the allotype.
</p>

<p>
<i>Anal angle.</i>&#x2014;The tornal area of the hind wing, or the angle between the inner and outer margins of the hind wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Anal ring.</i>&#x2014;A term for the vinculum (<i>q.v.</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Androconia.</i>&#x2014;Scent-scales; specialized scales of peculiar form found on the wings of some butterflies.
</p>

<p>
<i>Anellus.</i>&#x2014;A sclerotized structure supporting and often surrounding the terminal part of the ædeagus; it may also articulate with the bases of the valves, and its ventral part, in so doing, often forms a median plate below the ædeagus, which is called the <i>juxta</i>.
</p>

<p>
<i>Antennæ.</i>&#x2014;Segmented movable appendages of the head; often called feelers.
</p>

<p>
<i>Anterior.</i>&#x2014;In front; before.
</p>

<p>
<i>Apex.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the anterior distal extremity of the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Apiculus.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the hook of the antennæ of Hesperiidæ, comprising the segments distad of the angle.
</p>

<p>
<i>Area.</i>&#x2014;The space between two veins of the wing; also called inter-space or cellule.
</p>

<p>
<i>Base.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the part of the wing nearest the body.
</p>

<p>
<i>Bionomics.</i>&#x2014;The habits, breeding, and adaptations of living forms.
</p>

<p>
<i>Bursa copulatrix.</i>&#x2014;A large sac for holding the sperms, found in the ♂ genitalia.
</p>

<p>
<i>Carinate.</i>&#x2014;Keel-like.
</p>

<p>
<i>Cell.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the large area in the centre of the Lepidopteron wing from which most of the veins arise; also called basal cell, discoidal or discal cell.
</p>

<p>
<i>Cellule.</i>&#x2014;The space between the veins of the wing; also called area of interspace.
</p>

<p>
<i>Chætotaxy.</i>&#x2014;The arrangement of the hairs and setæ on a larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Chalaza.</i>&#x2014;A small tubercle bearing a seta at its apex.
</p>

<p>
<i>Chitin.</i>&#x2014;A substance forming the main constituent of the insect integument. See also <i>Sclerotin</i>.
</p>

<p>
<i>Chorion.</i>&#x2014;The outer hard layer protecting the egg, usually called the egg-shell.
</p>

<p>
<i>Chrysalis.</i>&#x2014;The pupa of a butterfly.
</p>

<p>
<i>Cilia.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the fringe of scales along the edges of the wings; also any fringe of fine hairs. (Sing., cilium.)
</p>

<p>
<i>Claspers.</i>&#x2014;In larvæ, applied to the anal prolegs; also organs of the ♂ genitalia. Also called valves (<i>q.v.</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Clypeus.</i>&#x2014;A fixed sclerite above the labium or upper lip.
</p>

<p>
<i>Cornuti.</i>&#x2014;Slender, heavily sclerotized spines, occurring on the eversible membrane of the penis.
</p>

<p>
<i>Costa.</i>&#x2014;The anterior margin of the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Cotype.</i>&#x2014;Any one of all the specimens before the describer when a species is named, no single one of which is selected as the type.
</p>

<p>
<i>Coxa.</i>&#x2014;The segment by which the leg is articulated to the thorax.
</p>

<p>
<i>Cremaster.</i>&#x2014;An anal process of the pupa by which it is attached.
</p>

<p>
<i>Crochets.</i>&#x2014;Minute hooks on the soles of the prolegs of larvæ.
</p>

<p>
<i>Dimorphism.</i>&#x2014;A difference in form, colour, etc., between individuals of the same species, characterizing two distinct types which occur in the same area.
</p>

<p>
<i>Discal.</i>&#x2014;Pertaining to the disc of the wing; applied to a wing-marking which is placed at or near the centre of the wing, and is entirely or partly included within the discal cell.
</p>

<p>
<i>Discocellulars.</i>&#x2014;Veins closing the cell of the wing; also called cross-veins. 
</p>

<p>
<i>Distad.</i>&#x2014;Toward the distal end.
</p>

<p>
<i>Distal.</i>&#x2014;The part farthest from the body or base; opposed to proximal.
</p>

<p>
<i>Dorsad.</i>&#x2014;In the direction of the dorsum or back of an insect.
</p>

<p>
<i>Dorsum.</i>&#x2014;The posterior margin of the wing; also called the inner margin.
</p>

<p>
<i>Ecdysis.</i>&#x2014;The act of ``moulting'' or casting the skin by the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;The fertilized ovum.
</p>

<p>
<i>Emarginate.</i>&#x2014;Notched; with an obtuse, rounded or quadrate section cut from a margin.
</p>

<p>
<i>Emergence.</i>&#x2014;The escape of a winged insect from its cocoon, pupal case or nymph.
</p>

<p>
<i>Epicranium.</i>&#x2014;The main dorsal part of the head of the imago.
</p>

<p>
<i>Expanse.</i>&#x2014;The distance between the spices or other widest point of the wings when fully spread. Usually obtained by doubling the distance between the apex of the fore wing and the centre of the thorax.
</p>

<p>
<i>Falcate.</i>&#x2014;Sickle-shaped; convexly curved; of a wing, when deeply excavated below the apex so as to leave the latter acute and a little curved.
</p>

<p>
<i>Femur.</i>&#x2014;The leg segment between the trochanter and tibia.
</p>

<p>
<i>Fold.</i>&#x2014;A furrow in the wing membrane, lying between the veins.
</p>

<p>
<i>Form.</i>&#x2014;Any representative of a species which differs from the normal or type in some uniform character, and with which it interbreeds.
</p>

<p>
<i>Frenulum.</i>&#x2014;A stiff bristle or group of hairs on the base of the costa of the hind wing in moths, which fits into the retinaculum (<i>q.v.</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Fringes.</i>&#x2014;The edging of scales or hair on the outer margins of all wings, extending well beyond the margin.
</p>

<p>
<i>Frons.</i>&#x2014;The front part of the head above the clypeus; the face.
</p>

<p>
<i>Galea.</i>&#x2014;The inner lobe of the maxillæ.
</p>

<p>
<i>Geminate.</i>&#x2014;Arranged in pairs composed of two similar parts.
</p>

<p>
<i>Geniculate.</i>&#x2014;Applied to an antenna which is bent in elbow fashion.
</p>

<p>
<i>Genital plate.</i>&#x2014;In the ♂ a sclerotized area bearing the copulatory aperture.
</p>

<p>
<i>Genotype.</i>&#x2014;The species upon which a genus is based, and which is designated as the type of the genus.
</p>

<p>
<i>Glazed eye.</i>&#x2014;The smooth portion of the eye of a pupa.
</p>

<p>
<i>Gnathos.</i>&#x2014;A ventral subanal process in the form of a sclerotized arch which is hinged by a membranous base to the ventral side of the 10th segment in some butterflies.
</p>

<p>
<i>Gonopore.</i>&#x2014;In the ♂ genitalia a small opening situated beneath the anus, through which oviposition takes place.
</p>

<p>
<i>Gynandromorph.</i>&#x2014;An individual of one sex which exhibits on one lateral half the organic characters of the other, more or less completely.
</p>

<p>
<i>Harpe.</i>&#x2014;In the ♂ genitalia a sclerotized process of the valve.
</p>

<p>
<i>Haustellum.</i>&#x2014;The tongue; also called the proboscis.
</p>

<p>
<i>Hermaphrodite.</i>&#x2014;An insect in which both ♂ and ♂ organs are present.
</p>

<p>
<i>Histolysis.</i>&#x2014;The breaking down of tissue.
</p>

<p>
<i>Holotype.</i>&#x2014;The single specimen selected by the author of a species as its type, or the only specimen known at the time of description.
</p>

<p>
<i>Homonym.</i>&#x2014;One and the same name for two or more different things. (See <i>Primary</i> and <i>Secondary homonyms</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Imaginal buds.</i>&#x2014;Groups of special cells formed in the pupa and from which the imaginal tissues are built up.
</p>

<p>
<i>Imago.</i>&#x2014;The sexually adult stage of an insect. (Pl., imagines).
</p>

<p>
<i>Incrassate.</i>&#x2014;Thickened; rather suddenly swollen at some one point, especially near the tip.
</p>

<p>
<i>Inner margin.</i>&#x2014;The posterior margin of the wing; also called the dorsum.
</p>

<p>
<i>Instar.</i>&#x2014;The larval stage between each casting of the skin.
</p>

<p>
<i>Intersex.</i>&#x2014;Among Lepidoptera a rare condition of mixed sexes usually superficially indistinguishable from a gynandromorph, but differing from such in there being no difference in the chromosomes of the ♂ and ♂ parts.
</p>

<p>
<i>Interspace.</i>&#x2014;The space between two veins of the wing; also called area or cellule.
</p>

<p>
<i>Jugum.</i>&#x2014;In moths a membranous or spine-like process at the base of the fore wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Juxta.</i>&#x2014;See <i>Anellus</i>.
</p>

<p>
<i>Labium.</i>&#x2014;The lower lip; the tongue in Lepidoptera.
</p>

<p>
<i>Labrum.</i>&#x2014;The upper lip, which covers the base of the mandible and forms the roof of the mouth.
</p>

<p>
<i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;The grub or maggot stage of an insect; the caterpillar.
</p>

<p>
<i>Lectotype.</i>&#x2014;A specimen selected as holotype from a series of syntypes (cotypes), upon which a revised species is based.
</p>

<p>
<i>Maxillæ.</i>&#x2014;The second pair of jaws in a mandibulate insect. In Lepidoptera, present in the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Median spur.</i>&#x2014;A small transverse vein near the base of the fore wing in some butterflies.
</p>

<p>
<i>Median vein.</i>&#x2014;The lower edge of the cell from the base to vein 2.
</p>

<p>
<i>Mendclism.</i>&#x2014;The theory of organic inheritance advanced by Mendel in 1866 to explain the segregation, in definite mathematical ratios, of certain contrasted characters in subsequent generations.
</p>

<p>
<i>Mesonotum.</i>&#x2014;The primitively upper surface of the second or middle thoracic rings.
</p>

<p>
<i>Mesothorax.</i>&#x2014;The middle thoracic segment which bears the middle legs and anterior wings.
</p>

<p>
<i>Metamorphosis.</i>&#x2014;The transition from the larval to the imaginal stage.
</p>

<p>
<i>Metathorax.</i>&#x2014;The posterior thoracic segment which bears the hind legs and hind wings.
</p>

<p>
<i>Micropyle.</i>&#x2014;A minute opening or pore at the anterior end of the egg, through which fertilization takes place.
</p>

<p>
<i>Mutation.</i>&#x2014;A character, qualitatively new, appearing abruptly without transitional forms or slow development.
</p>

<p>
<i>Neallotype.</i>&#x2014;An allotype described after the publication of the original description.
</p>

<p>
<i>Nomenclature.</i>&#x2014;The fixing of its proper name to any biological unit; the study and application of the rules governing scientific names.
</p>

<p>
<i>Nomen conservandum.</i>&#x2014;A name which should be preserved and not be relegated to synonymy, as ruled by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature, but which does not have priority.
</p>

<p>
<i>Nomen novum.</i>&#x2014;A new name; abbreviated nom. nov. or n. n. Usually applied to denote a name which takes the place of one which for some reason cannot be used.
</p>

<p>
<i>Nominotypical.</i>&#x2014;Used where a species is known to have more than one subspecies or form, and representing the form to which was applied the earliest name.
</p>

<p>
<i>Notum.</i>&#x2014;A sclerite forming part of the mesothoracic tergum.
</p>

<p>
<i>Nova species.</i>&#x2014;New species; abbreviated as n. s., n. sp., nov. sp., sp. nov.
</p>

<p>
<i>Nuchal.</i>&#x2014;Pertaining to the nape or hind part of the neck.
</p>

<p>
<i>Obsolete.</i>&#x2014;Almost or entirely absent; indistinct; not fully developed.
</p>

<p>
<i>Occiput.</i>&#x2014;The posterior portion of the head or epicranium of the imago.
</p>

<p>
<i>Ocellus.</i>&#x2014;A simple eye, as distinguished from a compound eye, found on the vertex of the head of some butterflies. Also applied to an eye-like spot on the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Ommatidium.</i>&#x2014;A single element of a compound eye; applied to the eyes of larvæ bearing a single corneal lens.
</p>

<p>
<i>Omnivorous.</i>&#x2014;Feeding on a variety of plants.
</p>

<p>
<i>Osmeterium.</i>&#x2014;Fleshy, tubular, eversible processes producing a penetrating odour and capable of being projected through a slit in the prothoracic segment of certain Papilionid caterpillars and from openings elsewhere in the bodies of other forms. (Pl., osmeteria).
</p>

<p>
<i>Ovum.</i>&#x2014;The unfertilized egg-cell.
</p>

<p>
<i>Palpus.</i>&#x2014;A movable appendage of the labium or lower lip.
</p>

<p>
<i>Paratype.</i>&#x2014;Any specimen in a series from which a description has been drawn up, other than the one specified as the type-specimen of the species, when not otherwise designated.
</p>

<p>
<i>Paranychium.</i>&#x2014;A bursh-like attachment adjacent to each tarsal claw.
</p>

<p>
<i>Patagia.</i>&#x2014;A pair of processes attached to the prothorax; lobe-like structures that cover the base of the fore wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Pectus.</i>&#x2014;The ventral part of the thorax.
</p>

<p>
<i>Phylogeny.</i>&#x2014;The development of a genus, family, tribe or class; the genealogy of the species.
</p>

<p>
<i>Pilose.</i>&#x2014;Covered with soft down or short hairs.
</p>

<p>
<i>Planta.</i>&#x2014;The soles of the prolegs of the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Pleurum.</i>&#x2014;A lateral plate of the thorax or abdomen.
</p>

<p>
<i>Plumules.</i>&#x2014;The specialized scent-scales found on the wings of some butterflies; also called androconia (<i>q.v.</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Polymorphic.</i>&#x2014;Occurring in several forms.
</p>

<p>
<i>Porrect.</i>&#x2014;Extending forward horizontally.
</p>

<p>
<i>Post-discal.</i>&#x2014;Beyond the disc; applied to a line or other marking on the wing placed beyond the cell, but nearer to the cell than to the margin.
</p>

<p>
<i>Posterior.</i>&#x2014;Hinder or hindmost; opposed to anterior.
</p>

<p>
<i>Procostal cell.</i>&#x2014;An enclosed area formed by the precostal vein.
</p>

<p>
<i>Precostal spur.</i>&#x2014;A short process or veinlet at the base of the hind wing of many butterflies; also called the procostal or humeral vein.
</p>

<p>
<i>Primary homonym.</i>&#x2014;A combination of a generic and a specific name which has previously been used as the designation of a new species.
</p>

<p>
<i>Prolegs.</i>&#x2014;The abdominal legs of the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Pronotum.</i>&#x2014;A tufted scale behind the head of a butterfly. The upper or dorsal surface of the prothorax.
</p>

<p>
<i>Prothoracic shield.</i>&#x2014;A sclerotized dorsal plate on the prothorax of a larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Prothorax.</i>&#x2014;The anterior thoracic segment.
</p>

<p>
<i>Proximad.</i>&#x2014;Toward the proximal end.
</p>

<p>
<i>Proximal.</i>&#x2014;The part nearest the base or nearest the body; opposed to distal.
</p>

<p>
<i>Pulvillus.</i>&#x2014;A small pad on the end tarsal segment.
</p>

<p>
<i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;The resting stage of an insect; in butterflies also called chrysalis.
</p>

<p>
<i>Race.</i>&#x2014;A subspecies (<i>q.v.</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Retinaculum.</i>&#x2014;A bar, groove, or group of bristles in the basal costal area of the fore wing of moths, engaging the frenulum when the wings are expanded.
</p>

<p>
<i>Saccus.</i>&#x2014;The posterior process of the 9th abdominal tergite.
</p>

<p>
<i>Scaphium.</i>&#x2014;A structure found in many ♂ genitalia, situated beneath the anus and attached to the 10th segment. The true scaphium is a dorsal process of the 10th segment, widely known as the uncus (<i>q.v.</i>).
</p>

<p>
<i>Sclerite.</i>&#x2014;One of the several hard pieces of chitin which go to form a segment of the insect skeleton; any piece of the body-wall bounded by sutures.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sclerotin.</i>&#x2014;The substance or substances forming the hard parts of the insect skeleton, of variable chemical composition. See also <i>Chitin</i>.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sclerotized.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the insect integument, hardened in the definite areas by deposition or formation of substances other than chitin in the cuticula.
</p>

<p>
<i>Scolus.</i>&#x2014;A thorny process bearing spiny setæ, found in the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sculptured eye.</i>&#x2014;The sculptured portion of the eye of a pupa.
</p>

<p>
<i>Scutellate.</i>&#x2014;Divided into surfaces like small plates.
</p>

<p>
<i>Scutellum.</i>&#x2014;A small posterior sclerite of the notum.
</p>

<p>
<i>Scutum.</i>&#x2014;An anterior sclerite of the notum.
</p>

<p>
<i>Secondary homonym.</i>&#x2014;The trivial name of a species transferred from one genus to another, and identical with the name of a species already existing in the genus to which it is transferred.
</p>

<p>
<i>Seta.</i>&#x2014;A bristle or hair.
</p>

<p>
<i>Setiferous.</i>&#x2014;Set with or bearing setæ.
</p>

<p>
<i>Somatic mosaic.</i>&#x2014;The presence on the wing of part of the pattern peculiar to the other sex, the genitalia being of one sex only.
</p>

<p>
<i>Spatulate.</i>&#x2014;Rounded and broad at the tip, attenuate at the base.
</p>

<p>
<i>Specific name.</i>&#x2014;The true binomial specific name (<i>nomen specificum</i>) is the generic name (<i>nomen genericum</i>) and the trivial name (<i>nomen trivialium</i>) together.
</p>

<p>
<i>Spermatheca.</i>&#x2014;The sac or reservoir in the female that receives the sperms.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sphragis.</i>&#x2014;A horny pouch on the end of the abdomen of the female of certain butterflies after fertilization.
</p>

<p>
<i>Spinneret.</i>&#x2014;An organ of the larval tongue serving to spin the silk.
</p>

<p>
<i>Spiracle.</i>&#x2014;A small opening in the outer cuticle by which air is admitted to the tracheæ.
</p>

<p>
<i>Spiracular.</i>&#x2014;Of or pertaining to the spiracles.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sternite.</i>&#x2014;A ventral plate of the abdomen.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sternum.</i>&#x2014;The ventral thoracic plate.
</p>

<p>
<i>Subspecies.</i>&#x2014;In Lepidoptera a variety of a species differing from the nominotypical form to a greater or less degree, and occupying a different area. Also called a geographical race.
</p>

<p>
<i>Supraspiracular line.</i>&#x2014;In caterpillars, a line or stripe above the spiracles.
</p>

<p>
<i>Suranal plate.</i>&#x2014;A sclarotized plate on the last abdominal segment of the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Synonym.</i>&#x2014;Two or more different names for one and the same thing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tarsus.</i>&#x2014;The foot or terminal segment of the leg.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tegulæ.</i>&#x2014;Lateral shield-like processes of the mesonotum; also called shoulder-tufts.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tegumen.</i>&#x2014;The modified 9th abdominal segment of the male.
</p>

<p>
<i>Teratological.</i>&#x2014;Applied to monstrosities, as the duplication of organs, or absence of organs.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tergite.</i>&#x2014;A dorsal sclerite or part of a segment, especially when such part consists of a single sclerite.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tergum.</i>&#x2014;The upper or dorsal surface of any body segment of an insect, whether it consists of one or more than one sclerite.
</p>

<p>
<i>Termen.</i>&#x2014;The distal or outer margin of the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Thorax.</i>&#x2014;The anterior division of the body between the head and abdomen, comprising the pro-, meso-, and metathorax.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tibia.</i>&#x2014;The leg segment between the femur and tarsus; the shank.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tibial spurs.</i>&#x2014;Movable processes of the tibia.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tornus.</i>&#x2014;Applied to the posterior distal extremity of the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Tracheæ.</i>&#x2014;The breathing-tubes of an insect.
</p>

<p>
<i>Trivial name.</i>&#x2014;The <i>nomen trivialium</i> is the part of the specific name other than the generic name, the specific name (<i>q.v.</i>) being generic and trivial name together. Defined by Illiger, 1800, <i>Terminologie</i>, pp. 117, 122, but first established by Linnæus in his <i>Philosophia botanica</i>, 1751, p. 202.
</p>

<p>
<i>Trochanter.</i>&#x2014;A small segment of the leg interposed between the coxa and femur.
</p>

<p>
<i>Type.</i>&#x2014;The single specimen or any one of a series of specimens from which a species is described; the species upon which a genus is founded, or which is selected as the type of a genus.
</p>

<p>
<i>Uncus.</i>&#x2014;As usually employed, the tergite of the modified 10th abdominal segment of the male. The term is more correctly applied to a dorsal process of the 8th abdominal segment in the male of some butterflies.
</p>

<p>
<i>Valves.</i>&#x2014;A pair of large, flattened processes of the 9th segment in the male; also called claspers.
</p>

<p>
<i>Vein.</i>&#x2014;A hollow thickened rib on the wing of the insect; also sometimes called nervure or nervule.
</p>

<p>
<i>Veinlet.</i>&#x2014;A minor vein, usually occurring in the cell of the wing.
</p>

<p>
<i>Venation.</i>&#x2014;The system of veins of the wing; also sometimes called neuration.
</p>

<p>
<i>Venter</i>&#x2014;The under surface of the abdomen as a whole; applied usually to the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Verruca</i>&#x2014;A kind of wart, bearing a tuft of fine setæ, found on the larva.
</p>

<p>
<i>Vertex.</i>&#x2014;The upper portion of the head or epicranium of the imago.
</p>

<p>
<i>Vinculum.</i>&#x2014;A part of the 9th abdominal tergite of the male; called also the anal ring.
</p>

<p class="chap-title">LATIN ABBREVIATIONS AND SIGNS</p>

<p>
<i>Auct.</i>&#x2014;Auctorum; of authors.
</p>

<p>
<i>C, Ca.</i>&#x2014;Circa; about; near.
</p>

<p>
<i>F.</i>&#x2014;Forma; form.
</p>

<p>
<i>Gen. nov.</i>&#x2014;Genus novum; new genus.
</p>

<p>
<i>Id.</i>&#x2014;Idem; the same.
</p>

<p>
<i>In litt.</i>&#x2014;In litteris; in correspondence or letter, and unpublished.
</p>

<p>
<i>Loc. cit.</i>&#x2014;Loco citato; place cited (publication and page).
</p>

<p>
<i>Non, nec.</i>&#x2014;Not.
</p>

<p>
<i>Op. cit.</i>&#x2014;Opere citato; work cited.
</p>

<p>
<i>P.p.</i>&#x2014;Pro parte; in part.
</p>

<p>
<i>Q.v.</i>&#x2014;Quod vide; which see.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sp.</i>&#x2014;Species.
</p>

<p>
<i>Sp. nov.</i>&#x2014;Species nova; new species.
</p>

<p>
<i>Spp.</i>&#x2014;Species (plural).
</p>

<p>
<i>Ssp., subsp.</i>&#x2014;Subspecies.
</p>

<p>
<i>Supr. cit.</i>&#x2014;Supra citato; cited above.
</p>

<p>
<i>V. et.</i>&#x2014;Vide etiam; see also.
</p>

<p>
<i>♂</i>&#x2014;Male.
</p>

<p>
<i>♀</i>&#x2014;Female.
</p>

<p>
<i>Dc.</i>&#x2014;Discocellular.
</p>

<p class="chap-title">CORRIGENDA</p>

<p>
Page 1.&#x2014;Marshall &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1882. This should read August 1883.
</p>

<p>
Page 75.&#x2014;No. 6. <b>Polydorus sycorax</b> (Gr.-Sm.). This should be <b>Polydorus priapus egertoni</b> (Distant).
</p>

<p>
<i>Papilio egertoni</i>, Distant, 1886, Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. (5) xvii. p. 251 (Perak).
</p>

<p>
This subspecies extends to the Malay Peninsula only.
</p>

<p>
It has been shown by Toxopeus (1936, Ent. Meded. Ned.-Indie, ii. p. 57) that the name <i>sycorax</i> applies to the race of <i>Polydorus priapus</i> Boisduval, from North-Eastern Sumatra.
</p>

<p class="order">Order <b>LEPIDOPTERA.</b></p>

<p class="sub-order">Suborder <b>RHOPALOCERA.</b></p>

<p class="title">INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF BUTTERFLIES, WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO INDIAN SPECIES.</p>

<p class="section"><span class="smallcaps">History of the Study of Indian Butterflies.</span></p>

<p>The first account of Indian butterflies was published in 1857 by Horsfield and Moore in their `Catalogue of the Lepidoptera in the Museum of the Honourable the East India Company,' in which many species from Java were included, and a number of excellent coloured figures were given of larvæ and pupæ. Until the publication of this book little attention had been paid to Indian butterflies, though a number of the more familiar species had been figured in the more general works of older authors. The next step was the publication in 1865 of a paper by Moore in the Proc. Zool. Soc. on ``The Lepidopterous Insects of Bengal.'' Then followed various papers by Moore and Butler on new butterflies from India.</p>

<p>The earliest really comprehensive work was Moore's `Lepidoptera of Ceylon,' the first volume of which appeared in 1881; this contained detailed descriptions and coloured figures of all the species then known to occur in the island.</p>

<p>In 1881 Lionel de Nic\'eville began a series of papers in the `Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal' and in the `Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society.' In collaboration with Mr. Wood-Mason he issued comprehensive lists of the butterflies of Cachar and the Andaman Islands, as well as useful revisions of various genera. In 1882, in collaboration with Major G. F. L. Marshall, he published the first volume of `The Butterflies of India, Burma and Ceylon.' The second volume appeared in 1886, followed by the third in 1890, both by de Nic\'eville, Marshall having died in the interval. Two other projected volumes were never published, as de Nic\'eville died in 1901. These three volumes contain a wealth of detail, and constitute perhaps the most important contribution to the study of Indian butterflies that has yet been produced. This work deals with all but the Papilionidæ, Pieridæ, and Hesperiidæ.</p>

<p>In 1890 Moore commenced the publication of the `Lepidoptera Indica,' in which he gave a complete description and figure of every known butterfly, besides numerous notes on their habits and distribution. This work ran to ten quarto volumes, of which Moore was responsible for seven before his death; the remaining three volumes were written by the late Colonel Charles Swinhoe, and were completed in 1913.</p>

<p>In 1905 Colonel C. T. Bingham's first volume on butterflies appeared in the `Fauna of British India' series; this volume contained the families Danaidæ, Satyridæ, Amathusiidæ, Nymphalidæ, and Riodinidæ. Volume II, containing the Papilionidæ, Pieridæ, and part of the Lycænidæ, was issued in 1907, but unfortunately Bingham died before another volume could be written.</p>

<p>Apart from various local lists and general notes, the only other works that have been published on the butterflies of India as a whole are :&#x2014;</p>

<p><ul>
	<li class="roman">`List of Indian Butterflies' (W. H. Evans, 1912). ``The Identification of Indian Butterflies'' (W. H. Evans), first published in the `Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society' between 1922 and 1926, and re-issued in book form in 1927. A second edition of this most valuable handbook was published in 1932.</li>
	<li>`The Butterflies of India' (C. B. Antram, 1924). This work covers only a part of the Indian area, and many species, including all the Lycænidæ and Hesperiidæ, are omitted.</li>
	<li>`A Guide to Collecting Butterflies of India' (H. D. Peile, 1937). This work gives details of over 600 forms, with much information on the habits, and contains 25 plates, including one in colour. It is a useful handbook for the beginner, based principally on the author's personal experiences in North-West India.</li>
</ul></p>

<p>The following important publications should be consulted by the student :&#x2014;</p>

<p>`Hesperiidæ Indicæ' (E. Y. Watson, 1891).</p>

<p>`Classification of the Hesperiidæ' (E. Y. Watson, 1893). This was world-wide in its application, but was adapted to the Indian fauna in 1894 (`Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society').</p>

<p>``The Common Butterflies of the Plains of India,'' by L. C. H. Young in the `Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society,' from 1905 to 1907, after which date, consequent upon his death, the series was continued by T. R. D. Bell (1909-1927). Bell's papers contain very detailed descriptions of the early stages, probably the most elaborate accounts of larvæ and pupæ ever written.</p>

<p>`The Butterflies of Ceylon' (W. Ormiston, 1924).</p>

<p>`The Macrolepidoptera of the World' (Dr. A. Seitz) : issued in parts, and written by various specialists. It gives brief descriptions of every known species and form, with a great many coloured figures. The Indian species are dealt with in the Indo-Australian and Palæarctic sections.</p>

<p class="section"><span class="smallcaps">II. Life-History.</span></p>

<p>All butterflies, like many other insects, only reach maturity after passing through a series of stages :&#x2014;</p>

<p><ol>
	<li>The <i>egg</i> or embryonic stage.</li>
	<li>The <i>larva</i> (caterpillar) or growing stage.</li>
	<li>The <i>pupa</i> (chrysalis) or resting stage.</li>
	<li>The <i>imago</i> (butterfly) or sexually mature stage.</li>
	</ol>
</p>

<p>The transition from the larval to the imaginal (adult) stage is termed metamorphosis. The change of form is a double one, first from caterpillar to chrysalis, secondly from chrysalis to butterfly.</p>

<p>The length of time in the egg stage is variable; in the case of some Lycænidæ the winter is passed in this stage.</p>

<p>The larval stage is generally the longest. It varies with the species and climate, and may extend from a few days to many months. In regions with a cold winter season the larvæ of some species hibernate, and commence feeding again in the spring.</p>

<p>All butterfly larvæ are vegetable feeders, with the exception of certain Lycænidæ, which devour Coccidæ (scale insects), Aphididæ, and Membracidæ; other Lycænids live in the nests of ants and devour the ant-larvæ. The food-plants cover a very wide range from grasses to trees, and in the case of some African Lycænidæ include even lichens. A species may be restricted to a particular plant, or may be omnivorous. Some Lycænidæ feed inside the fruit of the guava and pomegranate and others upon flowers. Cannibalism sometimes occurs. The first meal of the newly-hatched larva is often its own empty egg-shell.</p>

<p>During development the larva casts its skin, or moults, as a rule five times; moulting is more accurately termed <i>ecdysis</i>. The period between two successive ecdyses is called an <i>instar</i>. Before the skin is case the larva becomes quiescent for a short period. When moulting begins, the skin of the head is case entire, and the skin of the body splits down the dorsum (or back) along segments 2, 3, and 4. The larva often eats the cast skin. In many species each instar shows a progressive change in colour, pattern, and often clothing as well, so that full-fed larvæ frequently bear no resemblance, quite apart from size, to those that have just emerged from the eggs.</p>

<p>When a larva is full-fed it wanders about for some time in search of a suitable place for pupation. When it finally comes to rest it spins a silken pad which is grasped by the anal claspers; after an interval of some hours the skin splits open to disclose the immature pupa, which soon shrinks and hardens. The length of the time passed in the pupal stage varies in different species from a few days to many months.</p>

<p>Emergence, or hatching from the pupa, is effected by the splitting of the pupal case along the dorsum. As soon as the butterfly is free it takes up a position which allows the wings to expand. The wings are at first small bags filled with fluid. As they expand, by the blood being pumped through the veins, the two sides of the bag come closer and closer together, and finally fuse everywhere except along the courses of the veins. The wings and other parts of the integument gradually harden, and in an hour or so the butterfly is ready for flight.</p>

<p>Before the change to pupa an internal metamorphosis has begun which continues throughout the pupal life. This involves the breaking-up (<i>histolysis</i>) of all the larval tissues except the mid-gut, tracheal, and nervous systems, and their rebuilding into the imaginal tissues from groups of special cells called <i>imaginal buds</i>.</p>

<p>The final instar is the imago, which differs from all earlier stages in being sexually mature and provided with two pairs of wings. The length of life enjoyed by the imago varies from a few days to over a year. Some butterflies hibernate, or are torpid, during the winter. In captivity certain species can live for at least two years. Our knowledge of the duration of life of the imago is still rather imperfect.</p>

<p class="section"><span class="smallcaps">III. External Morphology.</span> (Figs. 1-8).</p>

<p>1. <i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;The egg consists of the <i>fertilized ovum</i> or female germ-cell enclosed in a shell. It is often called the ovum by entomologists, but this is biologically incorrect. The egg-shell is called the <i>chorion</i>; at the anterior end it is perforated by a tiny opening or group of openings, the <i>micropyle</i>, which is only large enough to admit a single sperm when fertilization takes place. The chorion is either smooth, ribbed or sculptured.</p>

<p>The shape of the egg varies considerably; it may be spherical, cylindrical or domed. In <i>Cyrestis</i> there is a lid which is pushed open by the larva on emergence. The eggs of some Lycænidæ exhibit the most beautiful sculpturing when seen under the microscope. The colour varies from white to green, yellow, orange or red.</p>

<p>The eggs are affixed to the food-plant by means of a sticky secretion. They are laid singly or in clusters.</p>

<p>2. <i>Larva</i> (fig. 1, I. II).&#x2014;The larva or caterpillar is an elongate cylindrical grub with a soft integument, and is composed of 19 segments, of which the first six are fused together and form the head. The head is best treated as a single unit, and is called here the first segment. It is joined to the body by a well-defined neck. The head is hard and <i>sclerotized</i> (<i>i.e.,</i> composed of chitin mixed with other substances), and is furnished with strong biting mandibles, very short antennæ, and normally a set of six separate eyes (<i>ommatidia</i>) on each side, representing the compound eyes of the imago. These larval eyes are often called ocelli, but differ inasmuch as the lens covers only a single eye-element.</p>

<p>The tongue (<i>labium-hypopharynx</i>) arises between the mandibles and the maxillæ. It is a reduced, unpaired organ, and carries the slender, pointed <i>spinneret</i>, from which the secretion of the silk-glands exudes.</p>

<p>The thorax is composed of segments 2, 3, and 4. Segment 2 is the <i>prothorax</i>, 3 the <i>mesothorax</i>, and 4 the <i>metathorax</i>. The prothorax sometimes bears a more or less strongly sclerotized dorsal shield, the <i>prothoracic shield</i>. Each of these segments bears a pair of short legs (the true legs).</p>

<p>The abdomen is composed of ten segments (5 to 14). On segments 7, 8, 9, and 10 are four pairs of short, stumpy, abdominal legs called <i>prolegs</i>. These are furnished with minute hooks (<i>crochets</i>) on the soles (<i>planta</i>). At the end of the last or fourteenth segment are the anal prolegs or <i>claspers</i>. The last segment carries a more or less strongly sclerotized plate called the <i>suranal plate</i>.</p>

<p>The <i>spiracles</i> are located on segments 5 to 12 to the number of eight pairs; there is also a pair on the prothorax. The spiracle is seen on either side of the abdomen as an oval horny area, and a small opening in each leads to the breathing-tubes (<i>tracheæ</i>).</p>

<p>The larva may be smooth, more or less clothed with hair, or provided with bristles or setæ. The arrangement of this vestiture is of taxonomic importance, and is called the <i>chætotaxy</i>. In all <span>Lepidoptera</span> in the first instar there are twelve <i>primary setæ</i> on each segment except the head. Four additional <i>subprimary setæ</i> may appear at the second instar. Each seta is primarily borne on a small papilla, or the seta may proceed from the apex of a small tubercle, called a <i>chalaza</i>. In many butterflies and some moths each originally single seta is replaced after the first instar by a tuft of fine setæ borne on a wart (<i>verruca</i>), or by spiny setæ borne on a strong thorny process (<i>scolus</i>). Some larvæ are furnished with filamentous appendages or tentacles (<i>e.g.,</i> Danaidæ), and others are covered with fleshy tubercles. In the Papilionidæ there is a peculiar organ situated behind the head, consisting of a protrusible tube dividing into two branches; this is called the <i>osmeterium</i>, and it emits a pungent smell, characteristic of the various species.</p>

<p>The coloration and markings of the larva vary considerably. The markings are usually in the form of longitudinal or obliquely-placed stripes. These are described as dorsal, subdorsal, dorso-lateral, lateral, sublateral, dorso-ventral, spiracular, and subspiracular, according to position.</p>

<p>3. <i>Pupa</i> (fig. 1, III).&#x2014;The butterfly pupa is commonly called a chrysalis. It has a hard, usually smooth, rounded and externally solid integument, no mandibles, and the appendages completely soldered down and covered over by external plates. It is usually attached to a silken pad by means of the <i>cremaster</i>. The cremaster, which varies in form in different species and genera, is a specialized process formed from the suranal plate of the larva, and carries numerous minute hooks. The eyes of the pupa are divided into a smooth portion called the <i>glazed eye</i>, and a sculptured portion called the <i>sculptured eye</i>. The second and third abdominal segments are usually free.</p>

<p>The position in which the pupa is placed varies, and is of systematic importance. In the Danaidæ, Satyridæ, Amathusiidæ, Nymphalidæ, and Riodinidæ (Erycinidæ) it is suspended free by the cremaster, head downwards. In the remaining families it is fastened, in addition, by a silken girdle round the middle. In the Papilionidæ and Pieridæ the pupa is placed head upwards. The pupa of <i>Parnassius</i> is enclosed in a slight cocoon placed just below the surface of the ground. In the Hesperiidæ the pupa is enclosed in a cell formed from a leaf. The great majority of butterfly pupæ are attached to leaves, twigs, stems or bark.</p>

<p>The coloration is often dull, but many butterfly pupæ are decorated with metallic gold or silver markings. The pupa may be either smooth or angulate and furnished with spines, and in some groups the wing-cases are sharply projecting.</p>

<p><i>Sex of Pupa.</i>&#x2014;It is usually possible to determine to what sex the pupa belongs. If the ventral part of segments 13 and 14 are examined, certain marks or scars will be seen. The scars of the anal claspers are on segment 14 above the cremaster, and form two slight, narrowly oval protuberances on either side of a short depression. In the ♂ pupa there is a similar but smaller mark on segment 13. In the ♀ pupa, besides the marks described above, the middle anterior portion of segment 14 is produced as a narrow process across segment 13 as far as the middle of 12, and its apical part bears a median depression. In cases where these characters are not easily seen, a single mark on segment 13 and no mark on 12 always indicates a ♂ pupa; a blurring of the segment margins and a mark in the middle of segment 12 always indicates a ♀. The particular segments are easily found by counting down from 9, which is the first broad segment on the ventral side. (See Bell and Scott, 1937, p. 15, figs. 4 C, D).</p>

<p>4. <i>Imago.</i>&#x2014;The body is divided into the head, thorax, and abdomen. The various segments are composed of separate hard pieces of chitin termed <i>sclerites</i>.</p>

<p>(a) <i>Head</i> (fig. 2, I).&#x2014;Small, hairy or scaled. The main dorsal part is called the <i>epicranium</i>, the posterior portion of which is called the <i>occiput</i>, the upper portion the <i>vertex</i>; the anterior portion above the clypeus is the <i>frons</i>. The <i>clypeus</i> (fig. 2, I, <i>c</i>) is a fixed sclerite above the labrum or upper lip, and is well developed in butterflies.</p>

<p>Eyes compound, placed on both sides of the epicranium, and separated. Externally each compound eye consists of a large number of hexagonal <i>corneal lenses</i> formed of transparent chitin; each corneal lens is the outer covering of a single eye-element, or <i>ommatidium</i>, connected at its inner end with a nerve from the optic ganglion. Besides the compound eyes, two simple eyes (<i>ocelli</i>) are often present, situated in a small triangle on the vertex. The ocellus differs from the ommatidium of a compound eye in that its single lens covers a number of internal eye-elements.</p>

<p>The <i>antennæ</i> (fig. 2, II; fig. 3) are segmented, movable appendages placed in sockets and lying more or less between or in front of the compound eyes. Their length varies from a half to three-quarters of the length of the fore wing, sometimes very short in Hesperiidæ. The shaft gradually thickens to a more or less pronounced club at the end, which in some genera is grooved on its lower side. The club usually narrows gradually to the tip, which may be rounded or pointed. In most Hesperiidæ the antennæ are gradually or abruptly bent about the middle of the club, sometimes into a hook (elbowed or <i>geniculate</i>); the club often ends in an abruptly formed point (<i>apiculus</i>). The antennæ are organs of perception and are provided with sensory hairs.</p>

<p>The <i>palpi</i> (fig. 2, I. <i>b</i>; fig. 4) are movable appendages of the labium or lower lip, which in butterflies is reduced to a small basal piece; they usually curve up in front of the face between the eyes. They are composed of three segments, which vary in shape in different groups. There is a short basal segment, a comparatively long middle one, and a narrow terminal one of variable length; the basal and middle segments are densely clothed with scales and often with hairs; the terminal segment may be blunt or pointed and may be placed at an angle with the second segment, inside which it may sometimes be concealed. The palpi may be either erect (against the frons) or porrect (horizontal).</p>

<p><i>Mouth-parts</i> (fig. 2, I, <i>a</i>).&#x2014;Butterflies feed by sucking up plant juices through a long sucking-tube which, when not in use, is coiled up like a watch-spring between the palpi. This tube is a modification of the inner lobes (<i>galea</i>) of the maxillæ; each galea has become elongated, and both are fused together to form the tongue, the inner grooves of the galea forming the cavity of the tube. This organ is often loosely called a proboscis, but is better termed the <i>haustellum</i>.</p>

<p>(b) <i>Thorax</i> (fig. 2, III).&#x2014;Composed of three segments, called the <i>prothorax, mesothorax</i>, and <i>metathorax</i> (fig. 2, III. <i>p</i>) respectively. Each of these bears a pair of segmented legs. The prothorax is small and like a collar; it carries a pair of dorso-lateral processes directed backwards, termed <i>patagia</i> (fig. 2, III). In front of the patagia, behind the head, is the <i>pronotum</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>e</i>), developed as a tufted scale. The mesothorax is large, the metathorax much reduced.</p>

<p>Each thoracic segment is divided into a dorsal plate or <i>tergum</i>, right and left lateral plates or <i>pleura</i>, and a ventral plate or <i>sternum</i>. There are secondary divisions of these. The tergum of the mesothorax has a strongly-built sclerite called the <i>notum</i>, and this has an anterior sclerite called the <i>scutum</i>, with a small posterior sclerite, the <i>scutellum</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>n</i>); the scutum is very large and convex. These sclerites of the mesothorax are, therefore, called the <i>mesonotum</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>g</i>), etc., those of the metathorax the <i>metanotum</i>, etc. On the mesonotum, at the sides anteriorly, are a pair of backwardly-directed shield-like processes called the <i>tegulæ</i> or shoulder-tufts, usually heavily scaled. A pair of spiracles is present in the membrane between the pro- and mesothorax.</p>

<p>(c) <i>Legs</i> (fig. 5).&#x2014;The fore legs arise from the prothorax, the mid-legs from the mesothorax, and the hind legs from the metathorax. Each leg consists of five segments : the <i>coxa</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>i</i>) or hip, the <i>trochanter</i>, the <i>femur</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>k</i>) or thigh, the <i>tibia</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>l</i>) or shank, and the <i>tarsus</i> (fig. 2, III, <i>m</i>) or foot. The coxa is the segment by which the leg is articulated to the thorax; in butterflies it is large and more or less elongate. The trochanter is a very small segment interposed between the coxa and femur. The femur is the strongest part of the leg, usually not very stout, and is shorter than the tibia. The tibia is slender, and of medium length or long; it articulates with the femur by the knee-joint, which is freely movable, and usually rests at a sharp angle to it. The tibia is frequently armed with one or two pairs of movable spurs called the <i>tibial spurs</i> (fig. 5, X); the tibiæ may also be spiny, and sometimes are more or less densely fringed with hair. The tarsus is composed of five segments of variable length, the fifth one ending in a pair of claws, sometimes bifid (fig. 5, VIII), beneath which is a small pad, sometimes absent, called the <i>pulvillus</i>; adjacent to each claw is a brush-like attachment, the <i>paronychium</i>, which is, perhaps, used for cleaning.</p>

<p>The legs furnish characters of considerable taxonomic importance. In some families (fig. 5, II-VI) the fore leg is short, slender, and undeveloped, particularly so in the male, in which the tarsus consists of a short brush, or, in Lycænidæ (fig. 5, IX), of a single claw; the female tarsus in such cases is less hairy, or is simply scaled, and does not bear a claw, the fifth segment being furnished with a few short spines. Most butterflies have a pair of spurs at the distal end of the hind tibiæ; in all Hesperiidæ (fig. 5, X) there is a similar pair of spurs on the mid-tibiæ, and usually a second pair on the hind tibiæ.</p>

<p>(d) <i>Wings.</i>&#x2014;The wings are flattened, membranous expansions, strengthened by a system of thickened hollow ribs called <i>veins</i> or <i>nervures</i>. The fore wing is attached to the mesothorax, the hind wing to the metathorax. Each wing has been developed as a lateral expansion of the notum to which it belongs. The developing wing-sheath is supplied with a number of tracheæ which arise from two tracheal trunks at its base. The veins are first laid down as pigment bands in the developing wing-sheath, following the courses of the tracheæ. The vein itself is formed as a strong arch of chitin deposited over the channel of the trachea at metamorphosis.</p>

<p>The wings are movably articulated to the sides of the notum. When at rest they are usually held vertically upwards with their upper surfaces pressed close together and their under-surfaces exposed. They can be spread out horizontally, and sometimes the fore wing is brought back to cover a large part of the hind wing.</p>

<p>The shape of the wing is very variable. The upper or anterior margin is called the <i>costa</i> (fig. 7, <i>cm</i>), the posterior edge the <i>inner margin</i> or <i>dorsum</i> (fig. 7, <i>im</i>), the part next to the thorax the <i>base</i> (fig. 7, <i>b</i>); the distal extremity of the costa is called the <i>apex</i> (fig. 7, <i>a</i>), and the similar extremity of the inner margin the <i>tornus</i>; the edge between the apex and tornus is called the <i>outer margin, distal margin</i> or <i>termen</i> (fig. 7, <i>om</i>). On the hind wing the tornal angle is often called the <i>anal angle</i>.</p>

<p>The costa may be straight or highly arched, sometimes concave on the hind wing, and occasionally serrate or minutely saw-toothed on the fore wing. The apex may be rounded, pointed or falcate. The outer margin is usually more or less convex on the hind wing; on the fore wing it is more often straight or even concave, and is often crenulate or dentate. The hind wing is frequently caudate (tailed) at the end of one or more of the veins towards the tornus, which itself is often produced and frequently lobed. Along the outer margin is a regular fringe (the <i>cilia</i>) composed of closely-packed scales in a double row, those of the underside slightly projecting. The inner margin is normally straight, but may be concave or convex.</p>

<p>The wing-membrane is clothed to a greater or less extent, usually entirely, with <i>scales</i>. These scales are minute specialized hairs, and each is inserted in a very minute socket. Each scale usually contains a pigment derived from the blood, and so gives to the wing the colours and markings so characteristic of butterflies. The scales are arranged in regular rows and overlap like tiles on a roof. They are of varied form and sometimes characterize a group of butterflies. They usually bear minute ribs and pits, and in some species they are iridescent, the colour being usually due to the interference of light at the surfaces of extremely delicate laminæ; white is usually produced by reflection or refraction of light by structural elements located in the scale. In the Pieridæ the white colour is produced by a group of pigments called ``pterins.''</p>

<p>In addition to the normal scale described above, scales of another type are often found in the male; these are called <i>plumules, androconia</i> or <i>scent-scales</i> (fig. 6, pp. 14 &amp; 15). They are specialized scales which are connected with a scent-producing gland in the wing-membrance. Such a scale consists of an accessory disc, absent in Lycænidæ, apparently bulbous, connected with a short pedicel or footstalk, from which arises the lamina. The lamina is typically elongate, but may be oblong or rounded, and at the apex is furnished with fimbriæ (plumes), which presumably serve to distribute the odour. These scales present a great variety of form, and are often very useful as an aid in distinguishing genera or species.</p>

<p>The wing-markings are described according to their position. The wing may be divided into a proximal and distal half, the former covering the area between the end of the cell and the base, the latter comprising the remaining outer area. The part around the base of the wing is the basal area, between which and the middle of the cell lies the subbasal area; between the middle and end of the cell is the discal area; between the end of the cell and a point half-way to the outer margin is the post-discal area; between the post-discal area and the margin is the submarginal area, whilst markings placed very near the margin are termed antemarginal. The median area lies along the lower edge of the cell and below it, whilst between this and the inner margin lies the submedian or inner area. The markings are, therefore, described as basal, subbasal, discal, costal, apical, etc. They consist of bands, lines, spots, patches, and rings (eye-spots or ocelli) placed upon a general ground-colour which itself may vary in different parts of the wing. The bands or fasciæ may be solid, macular, or chain-like (<i>catenulate</i>). Lines may be continuous or formed of connected crescents (<i>lunulate</i>). Spots may be of any shape, usually round, triangular or somewhat square. Round spots, bearing one or two pupils, and perhaps surrounded by an iris, are called <i>ocelli</i>. The more exact disposition of the markings is described by reference to their place in respect of the veins. The space between each vein is called an <i>area, interspace</i> or <i>cellule</i>, and these are given numbers, as shown in fig. 7 (p. 16). When no reference is made to these spaces the veins themselves are referred to by name or number.</p>

<p>(e) <i>Wing-venation</i> (fig. 7).&#x2014;In butterflies and moths this is of a characteristic type. It consists of a large <i>cell</i>, called also the <i>discoidal, basal</i> or <i>discal cell</i>, usually closed, with a number of veins radiating from it. A typical butterfly fore wing has twelve veins, the first and last arising from the base, the others from the cell. The hind wing has eight veins, arising in the same way as those of the fore wing. Very often one or more veins are absent, especially on the fore wing.</p>

<p>Different systems of notation are in use to describe the venation. It is convenient to use the numerical notation as being most easily understood, though it takes no account of vein homologies.</p>

<p>Vein 1 is the posterior vein from the base, and two such veins, arising from the base, are typically present in that area, known as veins 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i>. Veins 2 to 11 on the fore wing are from the cell, though veins 6 to 9 may be stalked. On the hind wing veins 2 to 7 are from the cell, 6 and 7 being sometimes stalked, and vein 8 is from the base; in Hesperiidæ vein 5 is usually absent. On the fore wing of some butterflies there is a short branch or spur from vein 1 near the base and directed towards the base (based), representing vein 1 <i>a</i>; in addition, in most Papilionidæ, there is a short transverse vein near the base between the cell and vein 1; this is called the <i>median spur</i>; moths possess neither this vein nor the short vein 1 <i>a</i> described above.</p>

<p>On the hind wing near the base of vein 8 there is in most butterflies a short spur projecting from vein 8 towards the costa, being directed either basad or distad, but being some-times almost at right-angles to the costa; this spur is called the <i>precostal</i> or <i>humeral vein</i> and is usually two-branched at the end; strictly speaking, this is a veinlet as distinguished from a vein. In some cases the proximal branch is prolonged to the base of the cell and so forms a small secondary cell called the <i>precostal</i> or <i>basal cell</i>.</p>

<p>Special names have been given to each vein, and as these names often occur in descriptions, it will be useful to explain them here.</p>

<p>On the fore wing vein 12 is known as the 1st Subcostal or the Subcosta, and is often referred to as the Costal Vein; vein 11 is the Radius or 2nd Subcostal; veins 10 to 7 are the Radial Branches 2 to 5, or Subcostals 3 to 6; veins 6 to 4 are the Median Veins or Radials 1 to 3; veins 3 and 2 are the Upper and Lower Cubital Branches, or Medians 1 and 2; veins 1 <i>b</i> and 1 <i>a</i> are respectively the 1st and 2nd Anal and 3rd Anal, or 1st and 2nd Submedians.</p>

<p>On the hind wing vein 8 is the Subcosta or 1st Subcostal, often referred to as the Costal Vein; vein 7 is the Radial Sector or 2nd Subcostal; veins 6 to 4 are the Medians or Radials 1 to 3; veins 3 and 2 are the Upper and Lower Cubital Branches, or 1st and 2nd Medians; vein 1 <i>b</i> is the 1st and 2nd Anal or 1st Submedian; vein 1 <i>a</i> is the 3rd Anal or 2nd Submedian.</p>

<p>The distal end of the large cell is usually closed by three veins between veins 4 and 7; these are most often known as the <i>discocellulars</i>, but are also, perhaps more correctly, termed <i>cross-veins</i>; they are distinguished as upper, middle, and lower. One or more of these veins may be weakly developed on absent; in the latter case the cell is said to be open.</p>

<p>Small <i>veinlets</i> are often found projecting into the cell of the fore wing, and less frequently on the hind wing. Between the veins are found furrows or <i>folds</i> as they are called; these are most strongly developed in areas 1 <i>a</i> to 1 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p>The Table given below will enable the student to understand what veins are meant when consulting a description involving either the Comstock and Needham or the Rothschild and Jordan notations.</p>

<p>Table</p>

<p>(f) <i>Abdomen.</i>&#x2014;This consists of ten segments (fig. 2, III, 1-9); in the female the ninth and tenth are fused together. Each segment consists of a strongly sclerotized dorsal half-ring (the <i>tergite</i>), a somewhat less strongly sclerotized ventral ring (the <i>sternite</i>), and between them a soft membranous <i>pleural region</i> on either side. The sternite of segment 1 is always reduced.</p>

<p>The abdomen is cylindrical or fusiform and completely covered with scales. The anal extremity in the male often bears a short tuft of hairs or of elongate scales. Spiracles are present on segments 1 to 7. Segments 8 to 10 contain the copulatory organs, 9 and 10 being modified. In the male this modification presents a vast variety of form. Such variation is of great value in distinguishing species, and in some cases even groups. This does not always imply, however, that if two insects possess a similar structure they necessarily belong to the same species, though usually they are identical.</p>

<p><i>Male Organs.</i>&#x2014;These will be understood by reference to fig. 8, which is a composite diagram of the genitalia of a butterfly.</p>

<p>The ninth segment is entirely sclerotized, and comprises the tegumen, vinculum, and valve. The <i>tegumen</i> (<i>t</i>) is the dorsal part or tergite. The <i>vinculum</i> (<i>vi</i>) is the sternite, a ventral sclerotized band, often with a posterior prolongation termed the <i>saccus</i> (<i>s</i>). The <i>valve</i> (<i>va</i>), also called clasper, is an enormously developed lateral process, basally articulated to the vinculum; it often bears a process termed the harpe (<i>h</i>), located in the central area. The harpes serve as prehensile organs, and are well developed in Papilionidæ.</p>

<p>The tenth segment is mostly membranous, and is usually concealed within the ninth segment. It bears the uncus, scaphium, and gnathos, and the anal tube passes between the dorsal and ventral parts. Mehta (1933 <i>a</i>) has shown that the tenth segment, in the pupal stages, is visibly distinguished as a tergal and sternal part, the anal tube passing between the two sclerites. The dorsal process is termed the <i>uncus</i> (<i>u</i>) by most authors, although when first distinguished by Gosse (1883) it was meant to indicate a process of the eighth segment, found in <i>Papilio</i>. The uncus is situated above the anus, and is usually fused with the tegumen. It is not well defined in Lycænidæ and Danaidæ.</p>

<p>Attached to the dorsal surface of the anal tube is a sclerotized shield termed by most authors the <i>scaphium</i>. When first distinguished by Gosse (1883) it was meant to indicate the organ described above as the uncus (fig. 8, <i>u</i>). The scaphium is conspicuous in the Papilionidæ and in some <span class="smallcaps">Heterocera</span>.</p>

<p>Arising from the base of the uncus is a pair of hairy pads or lobiform processes which lie on either side of the anal tube. These are termed <i>socii</i>, and are not seen in all groups. In the Lycænidæ they are prominent as long, curved, spine-like processes. Arising from the tegumen on either side, near its apex, is sometimes found a slender, curved, spine-like lobe. This is termed the <i>side lobe</i> (<i>sl</i>), and is prominent in Hesperiidæ; in Lycænidæ the lobes are strongly curved and are usually termed the <i>falces</i>.</p>

<p>The <i>gnathos</i> is a ventral subanal process in the form of a sclerotized arch which is hinged by a membranous base to the ventral side of the tenth segment. It is usually well developed in the Nymphalidæ.</p>

<p>In addition to the processes of the ninth and tenth segments described above, there is the intromittent organ or <i>penis</i> (<i>p</i>), with which are associated the anellus and juxta.</p>

<p>The <i>penis</i> arises from between the bases of the valvæ. It is composed of an outer sclerotized sheath, termed the <i>ædeagus</i> (<i>ae</i>), which encloses a membranous tube, the <i>ductus ejaculatorius</i>; the eversible part of this duct is termed the <i>vesica</i> (<i>ve</i>), and it is sometimes armed with small spines termed <i>cornuti</i> (<i>c</i>) (seen in Nymphalidæ and danaidæ).</p>

<p>The ædeagus is supported, where it enters the body, by a hollow cone-like structure, which may be either strongly sclerotized all round, thus forming a ring, or else sclerotized only ventrally. This structure is ventrally supported by the vinculum, and on either side by the valvæ; it is termed the <i>anellus</i> (<i>an</i>), and is well developed in Nemeobiinæ, Lycænidæ and Hesperiidæ. The sclerotized ventral part of the anellus, forming a sort of shield or plate, is termed the <i>juxta</i> (<i>j</i>); this is well developed in Amathusiidæ.</p>

<p>The fundamental parts of the genital armature are the valvæ, tegumen, vinculum, and penis. Other structures have been evolved at different times, and so no single species exhibits all the structures described above, some being absent or reduced.</p>

<p><i>Female Organs.</i>&#x2014;Segments 9 and 10 are fused together, usually forming a complete chitinous tube with the anal opening at its end, and the opening of the oviduct (through which oviposition takes place) immediately beneath it. This opening has been termed the <i>gonopore</i>. The vaginal orifice is placed in the membrane between segments 7 and 8. This leads by way of a chitinous duct into a large sac, the <i>bursa copulatrix</i>, for holding the sperms; and thence by a tiny <i>seminal duct</i> to a small <i>spermatheca</i>, not always present, and continuing into the common <i>oviduct</i>. This arrangement enables the eggs to be deposited over a long period, the sperms being passed a few at a time into the spermatheca, whence they can reach and fertilize the eggs as they pass down the oviduct. The copulatory aperture lies in a sclerotized area, the <i>genital plate</i>; this is variously modified and is often of taxonomic value.</p>

<p>The fertilized females of <i>Parnassius</i>, and to a less noticeable extent those of <i>Acræa</i>, exhibit a peculiar horny pouch (<i>sphragis</i>) at the end of the abdomen. This is formed by the hardening of a fluid discharged by the male during copulation; the shape of the pouch varies with the species. The females of some species, e.g., <i>Chætoprocta, Tagiades</i> (Hesperiidæ), are furnished with a dense tuft of short hairs at the end of the abdomen, but as a rule there is no hairy tuft in the female.</p>

<p class="section">IV Classification.</p>

<p>Butterflies belong to the order <span class="smallcaps">Lepidoptera</span> or scale-winged insects (<i>lepis</i>, a scale, <i>pteron</i>, a wing). The order is conveniently divided into two main divisions or suborders : (1) <span class="smallcaps">Heterocera</span>, (2) <span class="smallcaps">Rhopalocera</span>. Some authorities distinguish a third division, the <span class="smallcaps">Grypocera</span>, which comprises the Hesperiid{\ae}. The first constitutes the moths, the second the butterflies with clubbed antenn{\ae}, whilst the <span class="smallcaps">Grypocera</span> include the butterflies with hooked antenn{\ae}. These antennal characters are, however, not to be entirely relied upon for distinguishing the divisions.</p>

<p>1. <i>Distinguishing Characters</i>.&#x2014;A butterfly can be always distinguished from a moth by the practised entomologist, but it is sometimes difficult for the amateur to decide. The following summary of the differences, as given by Evans (1932<i>a</i>), will enable the collector to distinguish one from the other after a little practice :&#x2014;</p>

<p>
  <ol type="a">
    <li>Egg usually dome-shaped, upright and sculptured. In moths it is usually rounded or flat, scale-like and reticulate.</li>
    <li>The caterpillar has, in addition to the three pairs of true legs, five pairs (four central, one anal) of prolegs, one or more pairs of which may be absent or reduced in moths. Also in moths the end of the proleg may be triangularly dilated, and the anal pair may be held stretched out behind, with the basal fleshy part often broad and flattened. A butterfly caterpillar very rarely has hairs arranged in tufts or pencils, or dense enough to obscure the surface. Butterfly caterpillars often have spines, branched or simple, but fleshy processes are unusual.</li>
    <li>The chrysalis of a butterfly may hang from a twig, be secured thereto by a girdle, or lie on a leaf or on the ground, or be enclosed in a cell made from a leaf. Moths commonly construct a cocoon for the chrysalis, bury the chrysalis in the ground, or conceal it under bark or in other places.</li>
    <li>Butterflies fly by day and moths by night as a rule, though quite a number of brightly coloured moths are often to seen flying in India by day. Some butterflies remain dormant till dusk, and some prefer the shade to the sun.</li>
    <li>Butterflies sit with the wings erect or spread out flat&#x2014;not, as moths often do, with the wings folded back.</li>
    <li>The butterfly antenna is usually knobbed or hooked at the end, and is never branched or furnished with cilia. The antenn{\ae} are always held straight, either erect or extended in front of the head; they are never curved, twisted, or folded back along the body or concealed under the wings.</li>
    <li>The butterfly eye is usually larger and more prominent than that of the moth.</li>
    <li>The division between the thorax and abdomen is better defined in butterflies, a distinct ``waist'' being formed only in a comparatively few moths.</li>
    <li>In order to ensure rigidity of the wings the base of the hind wing in butterflies is expanded into a shoulder fitting under the fore wing. In moths rigidity is attained as a rule by means of a frenulum or jugum, The <i>frenulum</i> is a stiff bristle ({\male}) or group of hairs ({\female}) at the base of the costa of the hind wing above. This engages in a catch, groove or group of bristles (<i>retinaculum</i>) on the lower surface of the fore wing; some ``Skippers'' are provided with this apparatus in its most elementary form. The <i>jugum</i> is a membranous or spine-like process from the base of the inner margin of the fore wing, passing under the hind wing and holding it between the jugum and fore wing.</li>
  </ol>
</p>

<p>2. <i>Scheme of Classification.</i>&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Rhopalocera</span> are divided into a number of families, arranged by some authorities in three superfamilies. The families are divided into subfamilies, which may contain large groups or tribes. The subfamilies and tribes are made up of genera. The genus consists of one or more distinct species which often form subsidiary groups. Such groups have been called subgenera. The subgeneus is not recognized in the present volume; it is inconvenient and found to be unnecessary, and its use is being discontinued by many entomologists. In place of the subgeneus the term ``species group'' is used, the name of the group being that of the species having the oldest name. The species itself consists of subspecies and forms.</p>

<p>The <i>species</i> is the basis of any scheme of classification. It is not always easy of definition. Where two forms fly together and do not interbreed they are regarded as species, and may be found to have differences in the genitalia. Where two similar forms do not fly together, and there are no important structural differences, they are usually regarded as subspecies of the same species.</p>

<p>A <i>subspecies</i> is a geographical race usually separated from another such race by barriers (horizontal, or vertical in mountain areas) which prevent free and complete interbreeding between the two. In island races interbreeding can rarely occur, but over land areas two races may easily meet and mix along the boundaries of their respective areas.</p>

<p>The term <i>form</i> is used in this volume to denote types of normal variation below the rank of subspecies. The term may be used alone when the nature of the variation is not known. Usually it can be designated, and the following forms may be recognized :&#x2014;Local form, individual form (or aberration), {\male} form, {\female} form, wet-season form, dry-season form.</p>

<p>The term ``variety'' has nowadays no precise meaning, and cannot be regarded as a scientific term.</p>

<p>The various forms may occur everywhere within the range of the species. The local form, so often termed ``variety,'' may be represented in another area as a subspecies, indicating perhaps the persistence or the recurrence of an earlier stage in the history of the species. The sporadic occurrence of a subspecific form outside its special area is compatible with the existence of two distinct races. A subspecies may sometimes be represented by the dry or wet form occurring in another area. These forms are discussed at greater length in the section dealing with variation.</p>

<p>3. <i>Phylogeny.</i>&#x2014;This treats of the presumed origin from previously existing forms, and indicates a view of their supposed genetic relationships. As knowledge increases, ideas on the natural or phylogenetic order of arrangement alter, and numerous systems of classification have been proposed and used since the commencement of the study of entomology.</p>

<p>The system adopted in this volume is the one which has found most favour among Lepidopterists, and is in more general use. When possible, the arrangement of genera and species is the one adopted in the most recent scientific revision. A phylogenetic scheme of arrangement of the families of the Indian <span class="smallcaps">Rhopalocera</span>, corresponding to the system in most general use, is given on p. 53.</p>

<p>4. <i>Nomenclature.</i>&#x2014;Each species is given two names, the first being the name of the genus, the second that of the species. If a species has one or more subspecies the binomial system is expanded to the trinomial. An an example, <i>Papilio machaon machaon</i> Linn{\ae}us is the nominotypical subspecies upon which the species name was founded. <i>Papilio machaon asiatica M\'en\'etries</i> is the subspecies subsequently described from the North-West Himalayas. If no second race is known the name is written in the binomial form, e.g., <i>Papilio crino</i> Fabricius. The species name, other than the generic name, is termed the <i>trivial name</i>.</p>

<p>It will be noticed that the name of the author (<i>i. e.,</i> the person who first published that name) is placed after the name of the species. This is usually abbreviated to save space, but it should be given in full in the case of a bibliographical reference. Again, the International Rules now demand that no comma be placed between the specific name and that of the author.</p>

<p>When the species or subspecies is referred to a genus different from that in which it was originally located, the author's name is placed in parentheses, e. g., <i>Troides helena darsius</i> (Gray).</p>

<p>A code of international rules, called ``The International Rules of Zoological Nomenclature,'' has been set up by zoologists for the guidance of authors, and for scientific clarity in the use of names. These rules have benn revised from time to time, and in their latest form are published in the `Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington,' vol. xxxix, pp. 75-104, July 30th, 1926. Up to this time few careful studies of the older literature had been made, and while such study is being prosecuted, the application of the rule leads necessarily to some changes of names. This may cause some irritation to those who have been long familiar with a given name, and here is a striking case : <i>Pieris</i> (<i>Anapheis</i>) <i>mesentina</i> (Cramer) has become <i>Anapheis aurota</i> (Fabricius). One has to remember, however, that such changes are for the general good, intended to reduce chaos to order, and making for stability by eliminating confusion. This process will necessarily take some time. The credit for a name must, as a rule, be given to the earliest author. A number of butterfly genera, which would become synonyms by a strict application of the rules, were finally accepted by the International Committee of Zoological Nomenclature as conserved (Rep. Comptes Rend. XII Int. Zool. Congr., Lisbon, vol. i, pp. 181-96, 1936).</p>

<p>When an account is published relating to any previously described species or form, the rules direct that either the date of publication of the name or a full reference to such publication be inserted.</p>

<p>Those who propose to describe new forms must ponder well before coining a name, and unless they are well acquainted with the genus, the bibliography, and the rules, should seek the advice of a specialist. A name which has been used already in the genus will become a <i>homonym</i>, and one used already for the same species will become a <i>synonym</i>; in both cases the names are invalid and cannot be used.</p>

<p>5. <i>Descriptions of New Forms.</i>&#x2014;The method of describing a new species, race or form should follow certain principles. A new name should appear only in a recognized scientific journal; it should be given due prominence in style of type, and should not appear in a footnote. In the case of a race or form, the author of the species or race to which the new name is attached should be given. The sex should be stated, and the description should be as detailed as possible with reference to the presumed nearest allied species or form. In the case of a species, or where the size is obviously different from that of the allied form, the expanse of wing and length of fore wing should be given in millimetres. The number of specimens of each sex should be stated, with their localities, the information under the latter heading being as complete as possible. The locality and sex of the holotype must be clearly stated, as well as its location in a definite museum or collection. Where both sexes are described it is advisable to indicate also the allotype. In the case of a new and obscure species, a description and figure of the {\male} genitalia should be given; in all cases a figure of the imago should be included whenever possible.</p>

<p>Names should not be given to aberrations, teratological (abnormal) examples, or to local forms which show no important differentiation from other forms flying with them, being subject to individual variation. Such names serve only to encumber the literature which, in the case of European butterflies at least, is overburdened with them (<i>cf.</i> the European <i>Parnassius apollo</i> Linn.). A single specimen will often be found to exhibit the characters of several so-called forms. Names given to the forms above mentioned have no recognized status in nomenclature.</p>

<p>6. <i>Types.</i>&#x2014;The specimen which has served for the description, or the specimen selected by the author as representative of a series which has been used for the description, is termed the <i>holotype</i>. This is the chief type, and this alone should be used for comparison; reference thereto is necessary to settle any doubt as to what the name represents. When both sexes are described, the sex which is not marked as ``type,'' or is second in the description, is taken as the {\female} or {\male} <i>allotype</i>, as the case may be. When the opposite sex is described subsequently in another article it is called the <i>neallotype</i>. When other specimens exist of the original series (from which the holotype was selected), these are called <i>paratypes</i>; they were formerly known as ``co-types,'' in cases where no holotype was originally selected. A co-type may be selected subsequently to represent the holotype; such a type is called a <i>genotype</i>.</p>

<p>It is important that all type specimens be provided by the author with a label giving the name and type designation; if possible the sex and year of publication should be added. The word ``Type'' alone on a specimen is not sufficient. Paratypes may all bear labels as such. These are sometimes very useful for exchange or to send to a museum in which the type does not exist. In cases where such paratypes comprise more than one species under a single name, as has frequently been the case, the error will in time be discovered by the specialist. In this way paratypes are unsatisfactory, but are useful if carefully confirmed.</p>

<p>It cannot be too strongly emphasized that all holotypes should be placed in national or other large museums where entomology is studied, and elaborate precautions are taken to protect the specimens. The main idea is for general accessibility and preservation.</p>

<p class="section">V. Ecology.</p>

<p>1. <i>Senses.</i>&#x2014;The organs of touch and taste are well developed in most butterflies, sight to a less extent. The eye, although complicated in structure, is not of high efficiency; it perceives a mosaic of indifferent definition at about a range of 2 inches, whilst at 3 feet it sees a mere blur. Experiments seem to show that butterflies are able to distinguish colours, but the ability to do so varies greatly according to the species. Colour can only be distinguished at short range, up to about 50 feet. Unusual movement is perceived at a distance, but whether or not by sight is not certain.</p>

<p>Organs of hearing have not been found in butterflies, though in moths a tympanic organ is often well developed.</p>

<p>The sense of smell is strongly developed, as butterflies are attracted to scented flowers and to a variety of odoriferous substances, whilst repelled by others. The males of many species have scent-producing glands, the odour from which is perceived by the female. Again, the female is able to distinguish the plant upon which to deposit her eggs.</p>

<p>The organs of smell, and probably of touch, are situated in the antenn{\ae}. Four types of sense-organs are found in the antenn{\ae}:&#x2014;(1) A short projection set in a cavity, (2) sensory hairs on the outer surface, (3) a stout, minutely toothed process, (4) a long, pointed bristle. The first and third are used probably for smelling, one for food and the other for the opposite sex. The second and fourth are used probably to sense objects to be avoided. It is well known that a butterfly can fly through a forest at great speed without touching a twig; if deprived of its antenn{\ae} it is unable to find its way about.</p>

<p>A fifth sense-organ exists at the end of the anterior or 3rd segment of the palpus, in the form of a comparatively large pit with a very minute opening; the numerous sensory hairs at the bottom of the pit are carefully protected from direct contact with solids. The function of this organ is unknown.</p>

<p>At the end of the tongue are tiny projections or papill{\ae} which are considered to be organs of taste.</p>

<p>The pulvillus or pad on the last tarsal segment is probably connected with the sense of touch. It is certain that some butterflies can detect sweet substances, for example by means of sense-organs on their feet.</p>

<p>2. <i>Scent-organs.</i>&#x2014;The plumules or scent-scales have been described on p. 13. Other scent-producing organs are found on the wings and bodies of many male butterflies. These consist of brushes, brands or pouches containing specialized scales. Such structures are often associated with a displacement of veins or a distortion of the wing. Besides glands producing odours attractive to the female, there are glands which secrete repulsive odours, serving as a protection against certain enemies.</p>

<p>The following summary of these characters in the various families may be of interest. The greater part is taken from Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>:&#x2014;</p>

<p>
  <ol type="a">
    <li><i>Papilionid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;Many species have a fold on the inner margin of the hind wing, and within this fold there is a cottony-looking fluff. Other species have pilose stripes on the fore wing.</li>
    <li><i>Pierid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;The fore wing and sometimes the hind wing are often furnished with plumules. Certain species of <i>Colias, Colotis</i>, and <i>Eurema</i> have sexual brands. Those of the genus <i>Appias</i> have a tuft of hair on either side of the anal segment of the abdomen.</li>
    <li><i>Danaid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;All are furnished with two (in <i>Hestia</i> four) extrusible brushes at the end of the abdomen, and many species have a brand or pouch on the hind wing. Many Eupl{\oe}ines have one or two brands on the fore wing, and often a patch on the hind wing above.</li>
    <li><i>Satyrid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;The greater number of species are furnished with one or more of these organs. Most species of <i>Mycalesis</i> and <i>Elymnias</i> have an erectile tuft of hair overlying a brand on the hind wing above, correlated with a brand on the fore wing below. One <i>Mycalesis</i> has, in addition, a recumbent tuft on the hind wing, others have a tuft overlying a groove on the fore wing above, and one has a brand near the tornus of the hind wing. Many genera (e.g., <i>Pararge, Lethe</i>) have scent-scales on the fore wing. Some <i>Maniola</i> have a peculiar brush within the abdomen, internal to the genitalia, called the <i>Julian organ</i>.</li>
    <li><i>Amathusiid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;Nearly all have these organs. They attain their greatest development in a <i>Zeuxidia</i>; this has four brushes or hair-pencils on the hind wing overlying brands, a brush on either side of the abdomen, and a brand on the underside of the fore wing.</li>
    <li><i>Nymphalid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;Very few possess these organs. Certain <i>Argynnis</i> and <i>Cirrochroa</i> have pilose vein-stripes on the fore wing above, and <i>Ergolis</i> has a large black area of modifed scales on the fore wing beneath.</li>
    <li><i>Riodinid{\ae}(Erycinid{\ae})</i>.&#x2014;This family appears to be devoid of scent-organs in so far as its Indian species are concerned.</li>
    <li><i>Lyc{\ae}nid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;These display a variety of characters. The subfamily Poritiin{\ae} have a tuft on the hind wing; the Gerydin{\ae} a brand or thickened vein on the fore wing. Among the Theclin{\ae} <i>Curetis</i> and <i>Amblypodia</i> have none; some species of the <i>Thecla</i> group have a brand in the cell of the fore wing, and in other genera a brand on the hind wing is correlated with a tuft on the underside of the fore wing, and a patch of modified scales is often found on the fore wing above. The Lyc{\ae}nin{\ae} or ``Blues'' generally possess scent-scales on the fore wing, mostly of battledore-shape, traversed by longitudinal ribs.</li>
    <li><i>Hesperiid{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;Many c{\oe}liadin{\ae} have brands or patches on the fore wing, or streaks of specialized scales along the veins. Some species of Cel{\ae}norrhin{\ae} and Pyrgin{\ae} have a costal fold on the fore wing; most have a pencil of hair on the hind tibi{\ae}, some have an additional pencil on the midtibi{\ae}, and one or two have it on the fore cox{\ae}. An <i>Odontoptilum</i> has tufts at the end of the thoracic scapul{\ae} fitting into grooves on the hind wing. A <i>Carcharodus</i> has a thick tuft of hair on the underside of the fore wing. The Hesperiin{\ae} and Heteropterin{\ae} often have brands as well as patches of modified scales and hair-pencils. <i>Cupitha</i> has a peculiar gland on the hind wing whence a wax-like substance oozes. The genus <i>Ge</i> has a curious circular tuft on the fore wings.</li>
  </ol>
</p>

<p>The nature of the brushes and brands in some Danaid{\ae} has been investigated by Dr. H. Eltringham, F.R.S. The brush consists of a delicate bag, from the inner surface of which arise long hairs or bristles. The bag can be turned inside out, and when thus everted the hairs stand out at right-angles to the surface of the bag. The brushes are impregnated with the scent and distribute it as the butterfly moves through the air. Some species have a small brand on the hind wing. This is a scent-producing organ containing compartments, each closed above by a membrane having a minute orifice in the centre and covered by a special scale. The scent-material doubtless oozes out from the pores and is retained by the cover-scale. The butterfly, in the few cases so far observed, strokes the wing-gland with its brushes and so transfers the scent to them for distribution. The scent is absorbed by a very fine dust formed in the brush-bag, and this dust is scattered by the brushes. In fact, in the words of Dr. Eltringham, ``the apparatus is really an animated powder-puff.'' Not all brush-bearing Danaids produce dust to distribute the scent. In <i>Eupl{\oe}a midamus</i> the scent is produced by glands in the brush-bag itself (<i>cf.</i> Eltringham, 1923).</p>

<p>3. <i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Every butterfly, upon taking its first flight, seeks food and a mate. Its food consists largely of the nectar from flowers, but many species will feed upon decaying animal matter and excrement. Others are attracted by rotting fruit or the exuding sap of trees. After pairing, the female seeks a plant upon which to deposit her eggs. It seems a mystery how the correct plant is always distinguished, whether it be a low herb, a shrub, a sapling, or the tender top shoots of a tall tree.</p>

<p>The flight of butterflies is as varied as that of birds. The practised collector can often distinguish similar-looking butterflies by their flight. The swift, galloping flight of many Papilios is in striking contrast with the weak, hesitating flight of many Pierid{\ae} and Danaid{\ae}. The characteristic flight of the Hesperiid{\ae} has given to them the cognomen of ``Skippers.'' The flight of butterflies has been discussed by Kheil (1884, p. 12), and his diagrammatic presentation may be worth further investigation.</p>

<p>The resting position of butterflies has been detailed already in sections 3, 4 (<i>d</i>).</p>

<p>The time of day when a butterfly is on the wing varies with the species or group. Most species fly up as soon as the sun has warmed the air; they rest again during the hotter part of the day, and fly again for two or three hours before sunset. Other species are only on the wing for a short time each day, and yet others may be seen at all hours of daylight. Some species, at home among the tree-tops, descend for a short time to suck moisture on the ground, or to feed at flowering shrubs. The sexes are not always found together, the males often congregating with other species, whilst the females fly singly in secluded places in the woods. Owing to these diverse habits it may easily happen that the collector seldom sees the insect, and it is considered as very rare, though in reality it may be common enough at the right time and place.</p>

<p>A peculiar instinct possessed by certain butterflies is that of <i>migration</i>. This has been observed in various parts of India. The available records from Ceylon and South India were summarized by Mr. C. B. Williams (1927). In the Palni Hills 21 species of Papilionid{\ae}, Pierid{\ae}, Danaid{\ae}, and Nymphalid{\ae} were observed to migrate southwards in the autumn, certain Pierid{\ae} (<i>Catopsilia</i> and <i>Appias</i>) northwards in the spring, and a Lyc{\ae}nid (<i>Cosmolyce b{\oe}ticus</i>) north-east, also in the spring. In Ceylon 69 species were found to migrate in the spring and again in the autumn, mostly from the northern part of the island. In North-West India <i>Vanessa cardui</i> and <i>Cosmolyce b{\oe}ticus</i> have frequently been observed migrating in the spring. In general, butterflies are frequently met with proceeding in a certain direction, and they are often observed far out at sea.</p>

<p>4. <i>Enemies</i>.&#x2014;Butterflies are menaced by enemies in all stages of their existence. This counteracted largely by the great number of eggs laid, many more than would otherwise be necessary to carry on the species at normal strength.</p>

<p>In the egg-stage the only protection is concealment and assimilation to the surroundings, whilst small size may be helpful. Cockroaches devour any eggs they find, whilst parasitic Hymenoptera often deposit their eggs in those of the butterfly.</p>

<p>The larva has many enemies, of which the chief are probably birds; but ichneumon-flies, besides other smaller Hymenoptera and Diptera, exact a large toll. The caterpillar may even change to a chrysalis, from which emerge one or more, often many, flies, but no butterfly.</p>

<p>In the imaginal stage the principal enemies are lizards, mantids, spiders, and birds to a minor extent : a lesser toll is exacted by dragonflies and Asilid flies. Most butterflies are well equipped to deal with these enemies&#x2014;a swift, zigzag or turning flight, wing-coloration, and resting position. As the danger of attack is greater when the butterfly is at rest, it has in many cases evolved an underside coloration which more or less harmonizes with its surroundings.</p>

<p>The various protective devices in the larva and imago are dealt with in the section on Mimicry.</p>

<p class="section">VI. Protective Resemblance and Mimicry</p>

<p>The phenomena with which this section is concerned may be grouped under two headings:&#x2014;</p>

<p>(a) Protective Resemblance, covering all cases in which the insect resembles its surroundings, and (b) Mimicry, in which the insect resembles another insect.</p>

<p>The subject is one of the most interesting and at the same time one of the most keenly debated of insect bionomics. It treats of the pattern- and colour-assimilation to the surroundings; also of the similarity of pattern and other likenesses which exist between butterflies of different families and different genera. Any discussion of this subject is inseparable from attempts to explain the phenomena. The Theory of Mimicry endeavours to explain these resemblances and tries to account for various pattern combinations and colour features, including also the development of curious structures and habits.</p>

<p>Whilst no one denies the existence of these resemblances, considerable controversy has arisen over the explanations offered to account for them. The theory usually accepted is based on evolutionary principles; it postulates that the cause of mimicry is selective feeding by birds. The data necessary to support this idea have been very slowly accumulated, and are as yet far too few to convince the sceptic. In spite of this, one cannot say with certainty that birds have not had a large share in directing the evolutionary steps towards the perfection of mimetic resemblances.</p>

<p>Whatever the various factors were which operated in producing protective and mimetic resemblances, they are, like other structures, the result of natural selection.</p>

<p>The subject is one of great complexity, and can here be dealt with but briefly. Reference should be made to the writings of Sir Edward Poulton, F.R.S., our greatest exponent of mimicry, who has given it the status of a science in itself. Many important papers by Poulton, Eltringham, Carpenter, Dixey, and others will be found in the transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Entomological Society of London.</p>

<p>(a) <i>Protective Devices and Resemblances.</i>&#x2014;Besides distasteful juices, a tough integument, and cryptic wing-patterns, many other devices have benn evolved among butterflies to protect them from enemies, not alone in the imaginal, but also in the larval and pupal stages. The larva is frequently coloured to harmonize with its surroundings; it may be armed with spines, or it may possess markings which, together with certain movements, give it ostensibly a terrifying aspect. Some larv{\ae} can eject a distasteful fluid to the discomfiture of an enemy. Others are brightly coloured, and feed by day exposed to view; these are possessed of distasteful qualities and exhibit warning patterns, as do the imagines. Contrasted with these are the palatable larv{\ae}, which hide during the day and feed only at night; some of these are rendered inconspicuous by resembling flowers and other plant-structures, birds' droppings, etc. The larv{\ae} of certain Lyc{\ae}nids are protected by their association with ants. Such larv{\ae} possess ``honey-glands,'' which exude a nectar of which the ants are very fond. In some cases the larva, when nearly full-grown, is carried by the ants to their nest, where it is tended by them until it pupates, emerging as a butterfly direct from the nest.</p>

<p>In the pupal stage still greater protection is attained. The pupa is usually concealed by its coloration and shape, and is further protected by its hard case and sheltered position. The pup{\ae} of some Papilionid{\ae} resemble pieces of broken-off twigs, and others are flattened and coloured to resemble the stone or rock to which they are attached. The pup{\ae} of some species, <i>e.g.,</i> the Hesperiid <i>Gangara thyrsis</i>, are able to make a rattling and hissing noise when disturbed.</p>

<p>In the imaginal stage we find other protective devices besides warning colours and cryptic coloration. Many Lyc{\ae}nids have tails, with eye-spots at their bases, in the anal part of the hind wing. When the wings are closed this part is deceptively like a head with antenn{\ae}; an enemy seizing this ``false head'' secures only a mouthful of hind wing, and the insect flies off again. Many species, when resting in the sun, orientate themselves so that they do not cast a conspicuous shadow. Such action may be heliotropic; in nay case the insect does not make the movement on purpose.</p>

<p>The mode of flight of many mimetic butterflies resembles the flight of the model. This is noticeably the case with some Papilios (<i>Chilasa</i>), but these have also retained the original Papilionid flight and, when danger definitely threatens, resort to this rapid flight to escape. The element of surprise in effecting a quick change, whether of flight or pattern, is often successful in deluding a pursuer. This again is well shown in the case of the Leaf-butterfly (<i>Kallima</i>), well known in India as the most striking instance of cryptic coloration.</p>

<p>Some species of <i>Kallima</i> exhibit great variability in their resemblance to dead leaves, all shades of brown and dark green and all types of leaf-marking being represented on the underside. The upperside of the fore wing is usually adorned with band of bright colour, rendering the butterfly a conspicuous object in flight. This serves to make the discomfiture of the enemy more complete when the insect comes suddenly to rest, protected by its leaf-like underside.</p>

<p>There is as yet, perhaps, no observation on record of a bird having been seen chasing a <i>Kallima</i>. They appear to be attacked, probably by lizards, as many specimens in collections have damaged hind wings. There is, of course, no evidence to show how the group was persecuted in the past, but to suppose that it suffered considerably is the only satisfactory explanation of this strange combination of cryptic coloration and bright colours.</p>

<p>(b) <i>Mimicry</i>.&#x2014;Two explanations are generally accepted to account for the mimetic patterns. The first was propounded by H. W. Bates in 1861 as the outcome of his observations on butterflies in Tropical South America. He submitted that one group, much more numerous in individuals, and possessing distasteful qualities, acted as the model for another group, less numerous, and not possessed of defensive qualities. The first group exhibited striking patterns and colours allied with distasteful qualities; such colour-patterns were termed ``Warning Coloration.'' This is known as <i>Batesian Mimicry</i>; it is less frequent than a second kind, the explanation of which was offered by F. M\dd{u}ller in 1879, from this observations on butterflies in South Brazil. He found that different species of distasteful butterflies mimicked each other, and explained how the loss from enemy attack would be greatly lessened by pattern associations among distasteful species. This is called <i>M\dd{u}llerian Mimicry</i>.</p>

<p>These two basic hypotheses do not explain how a sufficiently definite initial likeness came to be developed before it could prove of selective value&#x2014;a very general difficulty in all evolutionary problems&#x2014;nor how the many degrees of distastefulness were obstacles to survival of pattern, nor how the intrusion of other factors have aided or retarded the mimetic development. The student should consult the authorities mentioned above who have dealt with these questions.</p>

<p>Mimicry involves no conscious action on the part of the insects themselves, as is sometimes thought by those unfamiliar with the subject.</p>

<p><i>Models.</i>&#x2014;The butterflies which act as models for mimicking species must possess qualities which render them distasteful to enemies, also they must be very common&#x2014;on the whole more common than the mimicking species. They must possess a well-defined pattern. The addition of a striking coloration will also aid in protection, warning the enemy to leave them alone. The various types of Warning Coloration are found primarily in models.</p>

<p>Among the butterflies of the Indian region the Danaid{\ae} are the models for most mimetic species. The subfamily Danain{\ae} are all of striking coloration, with black and white, or yellow or greenish stripes and markings. In the subfamily Eupl{\oe}in{\ae} are many with white spots or patches upon a brown or black ground, and others with the wings shot with blue or purple. They are slow fliers and are very tenacious of life.</p>

<p>The larv{\ae} of Danaids feed upon species of Asclepiadace{\ae}, which re believed to contain poisonous substances; in one species at least a poisonous constituent has been found to be present as a complex organic acid.</p>

<p>Another group of models is found in the genus <i>Polydorus</i>, a section of Papilionid{\ae}, whose larv{\ae} feed upon species of <i>Aristolochia</i>. These plants, or at least some of them, emit repulsive odours and contain poisonous alkaloids.</p>

<p>Another group of models is provided by the genus <i>Delias</i>, most of which have brightly coloured undersides. Their larv{\ae} all feed upon species of Loranthace{\ae} (mistletoe). Little is known of the chemical constituents of these plants, but at least one species has been found to contain a powerful narcotic. The powdered dry leaves of <i>Viscum monoicum</i> are used in Calcutta as a substitute for strychnine and brucine.</p>

<p>It seems very probable, as suggested by Corbet and Pendlebury (1934) and others, that the organic poisons absorbed by the larva from its food-plant can be retained in an active form through the pupal stage to the imago. Here is a field for instructive chemical research.</p>

<p><i>Mimics.</i>&#x2014;The mimicking species may be either palatable or distasteful to enemies, and may be either as common as or rarer than their models. They usually belong to groups which exhibit considerable variation. Generally speaking, the mimic is palatable, with feeble means of protection, and is less numerous than the model. In many cases the {\female} is the mimic, whilst the {\male} may either resemble another model or differ altogether in pattern. Other species may mimic the same model in both sexes. Many mimics have the underside of the wings cryptically coloured, so that they harmonize with their surroundings when at rest, and are either comparatively invisible to an enemy or can be mistaken for a leaf or other object as the case may be. The model has no need of this additional cryptic protection, and has usually an underside pattern almost as striking as that of the upperside, being even adorned in many cases with some additional brightly coloured marking. Such markings are sometimes copied by the mimic, especially when cryptic colouring is not developed.</p>

<p>Models and mimics usually will be found to occupy the same faunistic area, and to fly together. Where the model gives rise to geographical races, the mimic is found to vary in the same way. As a general rule the mimic is not found beyond the geographical range of the model; but there are some notable exceptions, as, for example, the forms of <i>Valeria</i>, which resemble Danaids that do not fly in the same area. This case is explained on the grounds that their chief enemy is a migratory species of Wagtail (<i>Rosa</i>, 1937).</p>

<p>The phenomena of mimicry are still far from being perfectly understood, and a wide field for research into its causes still exists. Butterflies should be watched as closely as birds, and naturalists who do not wish to collect them may obtain much valuable data by patient watching and compiling notes <i>on the spot</i>. Any records, especially of attacks by birds, or specimens which bear clear marks of attack, will be welcomed by the Hope Professor of Entomology, University Museum, Oxford.</p>

<p>Following are a few of the more outstanding examples of mimicry in India. But it should also be mentioned that among the large family of the Nymphalids there exists a great deal of intergeneric resemblance, probably of protective value; certain pattern associations are formed, usually black and white or black and brown, e.g., <i>Limenitis, Parathyma, Neptis.</i></p>

<table style="width:80%">
  <tr>
    <td><span class="smallcaps"><center>Models.</center></span></td>
    <td><span class="smallcaps"><center>Mimics.</center></span></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae}</i></td>
    <td><i>Papilio polytes romulus, {\female} form stichius.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Polydorus hector</i></td>
    <td><i>Papilio polytes remulus, {\female} form romulus.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Delias belladonna</i></td>
    <td><i>Prioneris thestylis.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Delias eucharis</i></td>
    <td><i>Prioneris sita.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Danaus chrysippus</i></td>
    <td><i>Hypolimnas misippus, {\female}.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Danaus aspasia</i></td>
    <td><i>Valeria valeria, {\female}.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Danaus similis</i></td>
    <td><i>Graphium megarus, Graphium macareus, Elymnias nes{\ae}a timandra.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Danaus melaneus</i></td>
    <td><i>Hestina nama.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Danaus tytia</i></td>
    <td><i>Hestina nama, Chilasa agestor.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Eupl{\ae}a mulciber, {\male}.</i></td>
    <td><i>Elymnias malelas, {\male}.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Eupl{\ae}a diocletiana, {\male}</i></td>
    <td><i>Chilasa paradoxus telearchus</i> form <i>danisepa.</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td><i>Eupl{\ae}a diocletiana, {\female}</i></td>
    <td><i>Euripus halitherses, {\female}</i></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="section">VII. Variation.</p>

<p>The perfect butterfly is subject to individual, sexual, seasonal, and geographical variation to a remarkable extent. Species differ in the degree of variability of the wing-pattern, some species being more stable than others.</p>

<p>The sexes of most butterflies differ to a greater or less degree, either in pattern or colour or both. When the sexes differ in appearance the species is said to exhibit <i>sexual dimorphism</i>; when either sex exhibits two different forms that sex is said to be <i>dimorphic</i>; when more than two forms occur the species is said to be <i>polymorphic</i>. The best known examples of polymorphism among Indian butterflies are the females of <i>Papilio polytes</i> and of <i>Papilio memnon</i>, which are trimorphic in certain areas. <i>Chilasa clytia</i> and <i>C. paradoxus</i> are dimorphic in both sexes. The female of <i>Euripus halitherses</i> is definitely dimorphic, and each form is rather variable.</p>

<p>Seasonal variation is most marked in certain Indian butterflies, particularly in the areas affected by the South-West Monsoon. It is doubtless due in part to the effect of the climate on the larva and pupa, and in part to the very different state, at different seasons, of the vegetation upon which the larva feeds. In some species it seems likely that the characteristic has been inherited from ages past, and persists though the original causes have disappeared. This may account for ``dry'' or ``wet'' forms occurring simultaneously, or even in the opposite type of season, and in countries like Malaya, where there is little or no seasonal change. Microclimatic conditions seem also to play a part in the production of these forms.</p>

<p>In the Himalayas most butterflies have two broods, the spring and summer ones, and these show more or less marked differences; <i>Polygonia egea</i> is a good example. In the rest of India butterflies are on the wing all the year round, since life is never completely dormant as it is in the Himalayan winter. In some species. as in <i>Eurema</i> for example, brood succeeds brood and the extreme dry- and wet-season forms, though very different in appearance, can be connected by a series of intermediate variations. In many species there are two sharply differentiated broods, striking examples occurring in Satyrid{\ae} (e.g., <i>Melanitis, Mycalesis</i>), in which the underside of the dry-season form resembles a dead leaf, whilst that of the wet-season form shows conspicuous ocelli and striated or freckled markings.</p>

<p>Two other, and less common, types of variation occur in all families of butterflies. One of these is heritable whilst the other is rarely so. The first may be regarded as a ``sport,'' but more truly as an <i>individual form</i>. It may exist as a colour change, certain markings may have increased or disappeared, or a new pattern-character may be observed. The other type is called an <i>aberration</i>, and represents some derangement or upset of the organism; with it are classed specimens with a duplication or absence of organs (<i>teratological</i>), which are not known to be, or are rarely, inherited. It is often difficult to know to which type a certain variation belongs. The individual form is much more common than the aberration. As examples of the latter can be cited two unusually striking aberrations of <i>Papilio polytes</i>. These received the names, as distinct species, of <i>sakontala</i> Hew. and <i>walkeri</i> Jans. As examples of the individual form can be cited <i>Chilasa clytia</i> f. <i>dissimilis</i>, with forms <i>janus, papone,</i> etc.</p>

<p>Another, and still rarer, type of variation is the <i>gynandromorph</i>, the insect being partly male and partly female. Similar to these are the <i>somatic mosaics</i>, in which certain areas of the wings are marked as in the opposite sex, whilst the body-structure is of one sex only.</p>

<p>There remain to be considered the hybrids between different species. These are believed to be very rare in nature, and no specimen should be accepted as a hybrid in the absence of conclusive evidence.</p>

<p>Individual variation, when extended and reproduced over a certain area, leads to the formation of geographical races, and these may ultimately become so distinct as to be ranked as species. Such variation is to be observed in species confined to forest areas, in those separated from each other by impassable deserts, by cultivated areas, high mountains, broad rivers, or the sea. A very instructive account of how such races may be produced is given by Evans (1932 <i>a</i>), and may profitably be cited here:&#x2014;</p>

<p>``So long as conditions are suitable a species will extend its sphere to the possible limits. Gradually conditions change and the sphere occupied by a species may become divided into areas separated from one another by zones where the butterfly cannot exist. The climate and vegetation of one of the separated areas may change, and the butterfly will also change, either by bounds or little by little conformably with changes in the area, so that its appearance, structure or habits diverge more and more from the original form. Further changes may cause the separated area to become once more united with an area where the original species still exists, though probably in a modified form. The two forms of what were the same species may find that they are able to interbreed freely, when either one form will completely swamp the other; or there may remain a neutral area on either side of which one form is dominant; or they may carry on as dimorphs. The two forms may find interbreeding impossible and must then be regarded as constituting two independent species, and will always remain so, though they will develop on parallel lines and may in course of time resemble one another exactly and inhabit identical areas.''</p>

<p>As an example of this geographical variation in India, Evans (1932 <i>a</i>) writes as follows:&#x2014;</p>

<p>``<i>Papilio memnon</i> affords an interesting study. It flies from Sikkim to Malaysia; the {\male} is more or less uniformly dark and tailless; there are three quite distinct forms of female, one of which is tailed and looks quite different from the male. In South India, and in a slightly modified form in Ceylon, there flies a closely allied species, <i>Papilio polymnestor</i>, which is tailless, has the sexes nearly alike, differing from the male of <i>memnon</i> in having a broad blue band above. The two species meet in the lowlands of Sikkim, whence aberrations (variations) of <i>memnon</i> have been obtained showing a resemblance to <i>polymnestor</i>. The inference is that they can interbreed, probably with difficulty, but each retains its dominance in its own area and their border line is probably defined by the change in food-plant, preventing penetration into each other's areas. In the Andamans there flies the closely allied <i>P. mayo</i>, which has a male resembling <i>polymnestor</i> and an entirely different female resembling the tailed female of <i>memnon</i>.''</p>

<p>In some species variation in wing-pattern is relatively slight, and no geographical race has been developed. Such a species is said to be fixed, but there is nothing to show that it may not produce a new form at some future time. Other species resemble one another so closely in pattern that they were formerly classed as a single one. Structural characteristics, as in the genitalia, alone may have led to their separation, the considerable morphological differentiation being obscured by external similarities. Striking examples of this phenomenon are found among the Hesperiid{\ae} and to a still greater extent among moths; other examples occur in the Satyrid{\ae} (<i>Mycalesis</i>) and Lyc{\ae}nid{\ae} (<i>Tarucus</i>). Evans notes that a single <i>Zizyphus</i> bush may harbour a crowd of the little spotted <i>Tarucus</i> butterflies, consisting of as many as three distinct species, all superficially indistinguishable.</p>

<p class="section">VIII. Distribution.</p>

<p>The world is divided by zoologists into five faunistic regions, each of which has in the aggregate a special type of butterfly fauna. Each region is divided and subdivided into faunistic areas, each also with its peculiar types of species:&#x2014;</p>

<p>
  <ol type="I">
    <li><i>Pal{\ae}arctic Region.</i>&#x2014;This comprises all Europe, extending from Africa north of the Sahara (including Madeira, Canary Islands, and the Azores), and eastwards, embracing Western, Central (north of the Himalayas), and Northern Asia, Japan, and neighbouring islands. It may be regarded as forming a part of a Holarctic Region, in which is also included the North American or Nearctic Region.</li>
    <li><i>Oriental Region.</i>&#x2014;This comprises India proper, east of the hills bordering the North-West Frontier and south of the Himalayas, Burma, Southern China, Formosa, Hainan, and extending southwards to include the Philippines, Celebes, Flores, Java, and Sumatra.</li>
    <li><i>Australasian Region.</i>&#x2014;This comprises the Moluccas, New Guinea, Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific islands.</li>
    <li><i>Aethiopian Region.</i>&#x2014;This comprises Africa south of the Sahara, Madagascar, Mauritius, the Seychelles, Comoro, and other adjacent islands.</li>
    <li><i>South American</i> or <i>Neotropical Region.</i>&#x2014;This comprises South and Central Americal and the southern part of North America.</li>
  </ol>
</p>

<p>The faunas of all these regions have affinities with each other, sometimes possessing identical genera and species. We are here concerned mainly with the first two. A certain African infiltration is found in the western part of the Indian area.</p>

<p>The political boundaries of India in the north and west coincide very generally with the northern boundary of the Oriental and the southern boundary of the Pal{\ae}arctic areas in the region dealt with in this volume. This region has been divided into eight areas by Evans, who has prepared the following table specially for this Introduction.</p>

<p class="family-heading"><center>The Indian Faunistic Areas.</center></p>

<p>
  <ol type="I">
    <li><i>Ceylon.</i></li>
    <li><i>Peninsular India</i> (east of the Indus River, south of the Himalayas and west of the Brahmaputra River):
      <table style="width:50%">
		<tr>
		  <td><center><b>South India.</b></center></td>
		</tr>
      </table>
      <ol type="A">
		<li>Western Ghats:
		  <ol type="a">
			<li>Travancore and Palni Hills.</li>
			<li>Nilgiri Hills.</li>
			<li>Coorg.</li>
			<li>Kanara (to Bombay).</li>
		   </ol>
		</li>
	<li>South India Plains (Madras, Mysore, and Hyderabad).</li>
      <table style="width:50%">
		<tr>
		  <td><center><b>S.E. India.</b></center></td>
		</tr>
      </table>
	<li>Central Provinces.</li>
	<li>Eastern Ghats.</li>
	<li>Orissa.</li>
      <table style="width:50%">
	<tr>
	  <td><center><b>Plains of India.</b></center></td>
	</tr>
      </table>
    <li>Bengal, Bihar, and United Provinces.</li>
    <li>Central India, Rajputana, and Punjab.</li>
    <li>Western India (Gujarat, Kathiawar, Cutch, Sing).</li>
    </ol>
    </li>
    <li><i>North-West India</i> (Sulaiman Range, Safed Koh, Hindu Kush, Karakoram):
      <ol type="A">
	<li>Baluchistan and Zhob (Sulaiman).</li>
	<li>Trans-Indus, N.W Frontier Province (Safed Koh; Gomal to Peshawar).</li>
	<table style="width:50%">
	  <tr>
	  <td><center><b>Hindu Kush.</b></center></td>
	  </tr>
	</table>
	<li>Chitral.</li>
	<li>Gilgit and Yasin.</li>
	<table style="width:50%">
	  <tr>
	  <td><center><b>Karakoram.</b></center></td>
	  </tr>
	</table>
	<li>Hunza Nagar.</li>
	<li>Baltistan.</li>
	<li>Ladak.</li>
     </ol>
    </li>
    <li><i>West Himalayas:</i>
      <ol type="A">
	<li>Kashmir (and Murree to Abbottabad).</li>
	<li>Lahoul and Spiti (Inner Ranges).</li>
	<li>Kangra.</li>
	<li>Kulu (Simla).</li>
	<li>Garhwal (Mussoorie).</li>
	<li>Kumaon.</li>
	<li>Nepal.</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
    <li><i>North-East India</i>:
      <ol type="A">
	<li>Sikkim (Teesta and Chumbi Valleys).</li>
	<li>Bhutan.</li>
	<li>Assam:
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li>Khasi and Jaintia Hills.</li>
	    <li>Abor Valley.</li>
	    <li>Mishmi Hills.</li>
	    <li>Manipur and Naga Hills.</li>
	    <li>Lushai Hills to Chittagong.</li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
    <li><i>Burma:</i>
      <ol type="A">
	<li>North Burma (Irrawaddy and Chindwin Valleys above Mandalay):
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li>Kachin Country.</li>
	    <li>Chin Hills.</li>
	    <li>Bhamo and Ruby Mines area.</li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
	<li>Mid-Burma :
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li>Arakan Yoma to Bassein.</li>
	    <li>Pegu Yoma to Rangoon.</li>
	    <li>North Shan States (Maymyo).</li>
	    <li>South Shan States (Kalaw to Taunggyi).</li>
	    <li><a type="footnote" href="#fn-01"><sup>1</sup></a> Karen Hills (Taungoo to Thandaung).</li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
	<li>South Burma :
	  <ol>
	    <li><a type="footnote" href="#fn-01"><sup>1</sup></a> Moulmein (Dawnas Range, Ataran Valley).</li>
	    <li><a type="footnote" href="#fn-01"><sup>1</sup></a> Tavoy area.</li>
	    <li><a type="footnote" href="#fn-01"><sup>1</sup></a> Mergui area.</li>
	    <li><a type="footnote" href="#fn-01"><sup>1</sup></a> Victoria Point and Lenya Valley.</li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
    <li><i>Andaman Islands</i> :
      <ol type="a">
	<li>North Andamans.</li>
	<li>Middle Andamans.</li>
	<li>South Andamans.</li>
	<li>Little Andaman Island.</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
    <li><i>Nicobar Islands</i> :
      <ol type="a">
	<li>Car Nicobar.</li>
	<li>Central Nicobars (Camorta, Nancowry, Kachall, and Trinkat).</li>
	<li>South Nicobars (Little and Great Nicobar, Kondul and Pulo Milo).</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
  </ol>
</p>

<p class="family-heading">1. <i>The Areas considered.</i></p>

<p><i>Ceylon</i> is closely allied to South India and has a number of peculiar forms, some of which are related to those of the Malaysian Subregion.</p>

<p><i>Peninsular India</i>, in its southern part, is geologically a very old country, with some endemic species found nowhere else. Generally speaking, the butterflies are nearly allied to those of the Malaysian Subregion. The hills are the habitat of two or three Pal{\ae}arctic species.</p>

<p><i>Caluchistan</i> is mainly Pal{\ae}arctic, and has affinities with Persia.</p>

<p><i>Chitral</i> is in the main a part of the Central Asian section of the Pal{\ae}arctic Region, with a strong infiltration from the Himalayas.</p>

<p>The <i>West Himalayas</i> are in part Pal{\ae}arctic, particularly the inner ranges, and part Oriental, due to infiltration from the South and North-East India divisions.</p>

<p><i>North-East India</i> is one of the most interesting and richest areas in the world. The Central Asian and Chinese divisions of the Pal{\ae}arctic Region here meet the South Indian and Malaysian divisions of the Oriental Region. It constitutes a portion of the Indo-Chinese Subregion of the Oriental Region. Faunal boundaries are principally a question of altitude.</p>

<p><i>Burma</i> has affinites with Assam, South China, Tong-king, and Siam on the one hand, and with Malaya on the other. The accepted border between the Indo-Chinese and Malaysian Subregions runs through Victoria Point. The fauna is very rich, and many of the species are still very rare in collections.</p>

<p>The <i>Andaman Islands</i> show a close relation to the Indo-Chinese Subregion, though many of the forms are much modified.</p>

<p>The <i>Nicobar Islands are to be included in the Malaysian Subregion, exhibiting a close affinity with Sumatra. The forms are mostly modified, with races in North, Central, and South Nicobars.</i></p>

<p class="family-heading">2. <i>Distribution of Species in India.</i></p>

<p>The table below shows how the species in the various families are distributed between the eight areas. The figures are from Evans (1932 <i>a</i>), with slight alteration:&#x2014;</p>

<table border="1" style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <td>Family.</td>
    <td>Ceylon.</td>
    <td>Peninsular India.</td>
    <td>North-West India.</td>
    <td>West Himalaya.</td>
    <td>North-East India.</td>
    <td>Burma.</td>
    <td>Andamans.</td>
    <td>Nicobars.</td>
    <td>Total species.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Papilionid{\ae}</td>
    <td>15</td>
    <td>19</td>
    <td>17</td>
    <td>35</td>
    <td>62</td>
    <td>66</td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>94</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Pierid{\ae}</td>
    <td>29</td>
    <td>34</td>
    <td>56</td>
    <td>42</td>
    <td>52</td>
    <td>55</td>
    <td>15</td>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>99</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Danaid{\ae}</td>
    <td>12</td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>8</td>
    <td>14</td>
    <td>32</td>
    <td>5</td>
    <td>11</td>
    <td>38</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Satyrid{\ae}</td>
    <td>16</td>
    <td>31</td>
    <td>46</td>
    <td>56</td>
    <td>103</td>
    <td>93</td>
    <td>7</td>
    <td>6</td>
    <td>184</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Amathusiid{\ae}</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td>14</td>
    <td>24</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>26</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nymphalid{\ae}</td>
    <td>37</td>
    <td>51</td>
    <td>50</td>
    <td>86</td>
    <td>158</td>
    <td>174</td>
    <td>31</td>
    <td>16</td>
    <td>232</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Riodinid{\ae}</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>3</td>
    <td>2</td>
    <td>9</td>
    <td>18</td>
    <td>23</td>
    <td>1</td>
    <td></td>
    <td>25</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Lyc{\ae}nid{\ae}</td>
    <td>80</td>
    <td>89</td>
    <td>79</td>
    <td>122</td>
    <td>243</td>
    <td>314</td>
    <td>59</td>
    <td>34</td>
    <td>438</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Hesperiid{ae}</td>
    <td>45</td>
    <td>74</td>
    <td>28</td>
    <td>63</td>
    <td>189</td>
    <td>233</td>
    <td>39</td>
    <td>14</td>
    <td>307</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Total</td>
    <td>238</td>
    <td>315</td>
    <td>285</td>
    <td>421</td>
    <td>853</td>
    <td>1014</td>
    <td>170</td>
    <td>95</td>
    <td>1443</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p>Before the volumes on butterflies are completed there will be doubtless some alteration in the data given in this table, but the proportional specific representation is unlikely to be changed to any appreciable extent for any one area.</p>

<p class="section">IX. Collecting and Preserving. (Fig. 9).</p>

<p>1. <i>Collecting.</i>&#x2014;The first requisite is a net. The Kite or Ballon net, sold by most dealers in entomological requisites, is very useful, as it can be taken to pieces and put together again very quickly. The main support is a brass ``Y'' into which are fitted the cane frame and the handle. If such a brass ``Y'' is obtained one can make the net by bending a piece of cane for the frame and cutting a strong stick for the handle. The bag may be of strong mosquito-netting, and should be dyed green, brown or black, as white is apt to alarm some butterflies. The bag must be rounded at the bottom. There is another kind of net that is also very useful : this has an all-metal frame which folds together, and at the stick end is a ferrule arrangement to tighten up the frame, and into which the stick is inserted. This net has the advantage of greater reliability, as the frame of the Kite net is apt to break under a particularly strong sweep, and nothing is more annoying than to find one's net become suddenly useless when pursuing a specially desirable specimen. Nevertheless it is sometimes an advantage to possess a few Kite nets when employing native collectors.</p>

<p>To catch the insect in flight, make a rapid side-stroke; an insect at rest is best secured by a downward stroke. The bag should be at once twisted over the frame to prevent the insect from escaping, and then the butterfly must be killed. Get the insect into a fold of the net with its wings closed and then pinch the underside of the thorax. In the great majority of cases a light pinch is sufficient, but for a Danaid or <i>Parnassius</i>  a much harder pinch is necessary. There are many butterflies (Lyc{\ae}nids, Hesperiids, most Satyrids, etc.) which should advisably not be killed in this way; either damage to the fore legs or thorax or scales rubbed off the wings may be the result. The use of a killing-bottle is recommended for these insects. The use of a killing-bottle is recommended for these insects. This consists of a stout glass tube, fitted with a cork or rubber bung. At the bottom of the tube place a layer of potassium cyanide crystals and press it down; over this place a layer of dry plaster of Paris and press this down; three or four thicknesses of blotting-paper are now cut to size and laid upon the plaster, followed by a small wad of cotton-wool; a further three or four thicknesses of blotting-paper should be pressed down upon the wool. Not more than a quarter of the tube should be occupied by the killing agent and packing. Such a tube will remain dry for a long time, and after a while the moisture in the cyanide will cause the plaster to set and harden. As soon as the insect is dead it should be removed from the tube. Should it be desired to kill larger specimens by means of cyanide, a wide-mouthed glass jar must be prepared. A layer of cyanide crystals is placed at the bottom, and these are covered with a paste of plaster of Paris to a depth of about half an inch. When the plaster has set, it should be covered with several sheets of blotting-paper cut to size; when this becomes wet it must be removed, and either consigned to the fire or buried out of harm's way.</p>

<p>Another useful killing agent is carbon tetrachloride. As this is a liquid, some sort of absorbent pad must be provided. A wad of felt, or a piece of spongy rubber, secured at the bottom of the tube and covered with a few thicknesses of blotting-paper, will serve the purpose. This should be made damp, but not wet, with the liquid, drops of which can be added when necessary. For this purpose the tetrachloride can be carried in one of the brass chloroform bottles sold by the dealers. The liquid is extremely volatile, and an air-space must be left in the bottle containing it. If the vapour be inhaled it is liable to cause a headache. The vapour kills rapidly, and it is advisable to place the killing-tube against the outside of the net so as to quieten an insect, which can then easily be transferred to the tube. It is not known to change the colour of specimens, as is often the case with many Pierids subjected to cyanide.</p>

<p>After killing, the collector can adopt one of two courses. The insect may be either transferred to a paper envelope or pinned in a cork-lined collecting-box; all handling should be done with a pair of plain blunt entomological forceps. When the insect is transferred to an envelope the wings are closed over the back, with the antenn{\ae} between them or against the costal margins. It is important to place only <i>one</i> butterfly in an envelope.</p>

<p>The envelopes, or ``papers'' as they are called, should be made of some fairly smooth paper, not too thick nor too thin. Very smooth paper should be avoided, as the insect is apt to slide about when the papers are handled or a parcel is in course of transport. Transparent paper, often sold by the dealers, is also not to be recommended. In the absence of special paper, old magazines and certain newspapers may be used. The triangular envelopes are made by cutting out rectangular pieces of paper, and three useful sizes are 3 in. &#xd7; 4 in., 4 in. &#xd7; 5&#x00BD;  in., 5 in. &#xd7; 7 in. The method of folding the paper is shown in fig. 9 (1). The paper is folded along the diagonal AB so that the edge BC lies along the line BD. The flaps E and F are now folded over on each side. The completed envelope is shown in fig. 9 (2). The projecting edges of the flaps may be turned over or cut off. Note the position in which the butterfly is placed in the envelope. The flaps should not be gummed down, and the folds must be pressed flat before the envelope is ready for use. A quick and easy method is to pass the papers through a mangle or wringer; otherwise keep them under pressure for at least 24 hours. It is an advantage to use plain paper, as one can write the data upon it.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>A supply of envelopes of different sizes should be carried in a pocket-box, and as they are filled they should be transferred to another box.</p>

<p>Upon arrival home it is advisable to place the envelopes containing specimens for a short time in a killing-jar, or in a box containing cyanide or tetrachloride, to make sure that life is extinct and to ensure the destruction of all parasites; otherwise many Danaids and <i>Parnassius</i>, for example, will be found to have recovered, and even after several days may fly off when the envelope is opened.</p>

<p>Papered butterflies should be stored in a box (preferably of wood) fitted with a good lid and having plenty of powdered naphthalene at the bottom. If the specimens are to remain in the box for some months or more it may be advisable to coat the bottom of the box with a solution of naphthalene in chloroform and phenol. This will prevent mildew, as well as keep away pests. Such a wooden box should be enclosed in a tin one as a further protection against pests. Before the papered insects are packed they should be laid out to dry thoroughly; if packed when fresh they may become mildewed, especially in a tin. It is of course easier to pack a fresh specimen, and more envelopes can be pressed into the box without harm; but they must not remain thus packed for any length of time.</p>

<p>When the day's collecting is over it is advisable to go through the specimens, and in the case of Lyc{\ae}nids and Hesperiids, and in others where the sexes are not known, to squeeze the abdomen gently with tweezers so as to extrude the genitalia; in some cases a pin can be inserted near the apex of the ventral surface and the genital structures be pushed out. This will facilitate the determination of sex and of obscure species. Care should be taken to see that the body is sufficiently relaxed to permit such manipulation; in dry weather it is advisable to perform the operation in the field.</p>

<p>An important adjunct to the collector's outfit is a supply of bait which will attract many butterflies that otherwise are not often seen and are sometimes rare. The best bait is overripe or rotting bananas, pineapples, etc., as well as rotting meat of any kind. The fruit should be crushed, enclosed in large leaves, and suspended from low bushes in tall forest. These baits should be inspected in the late afternoon and early morning, and perhaps at midday. After heavy rain they must be renewed.</p>

<p>Whenever the collector comes across a butterfly new to him he should catch a good series, however common it may appear to be. Certain examples of some rarities in our museums still remain as samples taken because they were thought to be common and easily obtained species.</p>

<p>Another branch of collecting is concerned with larv{\ae} and pup{\ae}. Too little is known of these earlier stages, and every endeavour should be made to collect and breed them. If the rearing of larv{\ae} is accompanied by full data as to food-plant, times between and number of moults, and descriptions or drawings at each stage, important advances in our knowledge may be made. The caterpillars should be placed in airy cages covered with mosquito-netting, furnished with fresh food from the known plant, and kept very clean. When the larv{\ae} are full-fed some sticks, preferably from the food-plant, should be cut and placed in a sloping position in the cage. The larve will pupate upon these, and when the imago emerges it will climb up them to dry and expand its wings. The cages must be isolated from ants, being furnished with short legs which are placed in small vessels containing water with a little paraffin or creosote; or they may be suspended by wire or string which has been soaked with these strong-smelling liquids.</p>

<p>Where it is possible to breed a complete family from the eggs it is often worth while to keep all the resulting imagines in one series, and if the species be variable, and the parents are known and included, such a bred family becomes of much scientific interest, and may prove of considerable value in the study of genetics and variation. Any such bred families should be sent to the Hope Professor at the Hope Department of Entomology, University Museum, Oxford; here, in due course, they will become the subject of expert study.</p>

<p>2. <i>Preserving</i>.&#x2014;Before the butterfly is ready to be placed in the collection the wings must be spread out, also the antenn{\ae}, and perhaps the legs. For this purpose the specimen must be relaxed, unless it is still fresh and limp. Relaxing can be done in a tin with a good lid, or in a shallow glass vessel fitted with a lid or covered by a glass plate. A layer of damp sand, damp blotting-paper, or a large plug of damp cotton-wool is placed in the receptacle. Papered specimens can be placed on the damp surface, but loose ones must be laid on a dry sheet of paper. Precautions against mould must be taken, and the damp sand or papers should be changed frequently. It is not advisable to introduce carbolic acid as a preventative, but some crystals of thymol will be effective and are also harmless to the specimens. The time taken to relax varies. After a few hours the specimens may be picked up with the forceps and the underpart of the thorax gently squeezed. If the wings are readily movable, and can be pressed open easily with the forceps placed against the bases of the wings, the insects are ready for setting.</p>

<p>Another method of relaxing which has been recommended (Sevastopulo, 1936, J. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc. xxxviii, pp. 634-6) is to damp the papers and contents with methylated spirit and shut them up in an air-tight tin for two days. Specimens so relaxed can be removed from the setting-board after 24 hours. Care must be taken to see that the papers do not bear writing in ink or copying-pencil, as the spirit will affect it.</p>

<p>When the insects are properly relaxed they are first pinned into the groove of a setting-board of suitable width, the wings being spread out with the aid of a setting-needle and secured with tracing-linen or paper strips. There is not space here to give an adequate description of the method of setting. This is best shown by an expert in this operation, of which excellent accounts are given by Evans (1932 <i>a</i>) and by Corbet and Pendlebury (1934).</p>

<p>The boards with specimens must be placed in a ventilated box securely isolated from ants. When the abdomen is stiff and hard the insects must remain on the board for another 24 hours. In the case of butterflies which have been kept dry in papers for some time they should remain on the boards for at least two weeks. Specimens may of course be dried before a fire or placed in an oven with a gentle heat. An hour or so will suffice, but the insects must still remain <i>in situ</i> for several hours longer, or the wings are liable to spring upwards more or less after removal from the board.</p>

<p>The store-box or drawer to contain the specimens will be of a depth suited to the length of pin. If long pins are used for mounting, a store-box should be corked on one side only. It is preferable to use long pins of rustless steel; the specimen can be handled more easily, and there is more room for labels.</p>

<p>To guard against pests the most efficient substance is para-dichlorobenzene in crystals. This will kill anything introduced into the box, including the larv{\ae} of museum beetles. In very damp climates it is as well to keep the store-boxes in a zinc-lined drying case fitted with calcium chloride dryers.</p>

<p>When set specimens ``spring,'' <i>i.e.,</i> when the wings move from the set position, as they often do in damp climates, the specimen should be reset and a little viscous shellac (prepared by dissolving shellac in alcohol) applied to the base of the wings below.</p>

<p>Besides shellac for re-fixing the abdomen in some cases, another useful cement may be made by dissolving celluloid in amyl acetate. One can use discarded photographic films, which are stripped of gelatine and cut up into very small pieces. This cement is of value in fixing antenn{\ae}, wings, and pieces of damaged wing.</p>

<p>Gum may be required for labels and for mounting dry dissections. The following formula given by Tillyard (1926) is for a gum that will not become brittle in hot, dry weather, and will not form mould under damp conditions :&#x2014;Gum arabic (60 parts); sugar (30 parts); carbolic acid (2 parts); alcohol at 95 per cent. (8 parts); water (45 parts).</p>

<p>3. <i>Preparation of Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;For the benefit of those who wish to study these structures (and an examination of them is often necessary in the case of obscure species) a general account of the method to be adopted is given below.</p>

<p>It has been stated already, in the section dealing with collecting, that the genitalia can be squeezed out whilst the specimen is fresh. In this case the parts can usually be seen clearly at any time with the aid of a pocket lens. On the other hand, where the parts are not visible, proceed as follows :&#x2014;</p>

<p>The end of the abdomen is wetted with wood-naphtha, which will relax the parts; after removing one clasper apply the spirit to the inner cavity; only a minute or two is necessary for all Hesperiids and the larger Lyc{\ae}nids. Having thus relaxed the parts the insect, or the detached abdomen, must be placed under suitable magnification whilst dissection is carried out. Use a pair of fine-pointed forceps and a needle which has been ground down to three cutting-edges. The parts are kept in a relaxed condition by frequent applications of wood-naphtha, using a small paint-brush. One or both claspers may be detached, and afterwards the uncus with tegumen and vinculum, and claspers separately, are mounted on a card fastened to the pin which carries the insect. The clasper should be mounted to show the inside, and the uncus upright. Some practice will be necessary before a dissection can be made without damage; the work will be greatly facilitated by the use of a binocular microscope. This may be called the dry method; it is not recommended for Lyc{\ae}nid{\ae}.</p>

<p>For wet preparations the procedure varies with different workers. The abdomen is softened in a solution of 10 per cent. caustic potash, either by boiling in a small open dish (not in a tube) or by allowing the specimen to remain in the cold liquid for many hours. After washing in water, the genitalia can be dissected away from the body under water by means of two needles and the fine-pointed forceps. If the organs still require further cleaning they can be heated in the potash again, care being taken not to destroy the hairs and bristles. The genitalia, after being well washed in several changes of water, should now be examined, and a preliminary study made of the parts before they are dissected. The parts must then be transferred to 70 per cent. alcohol, twice changed, for a few minutes; thence through 90 per cent. alcohol to absolute alcohol, and finally into xylol or toluol for some minutes, after which transfer back through fresh alcohols to 70 per cent., unless it is desired to mount on a slide. Mounting on a slide is not recommended for the larger preparations. Once mounted, a complete examination cannot be made in these cases; moreover, some distortion may result from pressure, or the part may move during mounting, and not be in the desired position.</p>

<p>Prepare some small tubes containing 70 per cent. alcohol and fitted with stoppers made of elder-pith; corks are apt to stain the alcohol and discolour the specimen. These tubes should be placed in a jar, such as a fruit-preserving jar, with a stopper that hermetically seals the contents. This jar has a layer of cotton-wool on the bottom, and is filled with 70 per cent. alcohol. The tubes should contain a small label, written in indelible ink, bearing the number of the specimen from which it was derived. A large label on the outside of the jar will give a list of the contents. Any specimen of genitalia so stored is readily assessible for complete examination.</p>

<p>4. <i>Preparation of Larv{\ae}</i>.&#x2014;The collector should endeavour to preserve the early stages of the species he is collecting, whenever these can be acquired. It may be found convenient to have these in the collection with the imago. To kill the larv{\ae} it is best to use a fixative to ensure rapid killing and prevent contraction. Bl\'es Solution is well recommended, and is prepared as follows :&#x2014;Alcohol 70 per cent. (90 parts); formalin (40 per cent. solution formaldehyde) (7 parts); glacial acetic acid (3 parts).</p>

<p>The following method of preparing dry specimens of larv{\ae} is given by Tillyard (1926) :&#x2014;</p>

<p>``Fix the specimens alive in Bl\'es Solution, laying the tubes on their sides so that the insects die extended. In the case of certain larv{\ae} covered with a waxy film, into which the fixative will not penetrate, immersion for a short time in chloroform is usually sufficient to remove the film. Leave in the fixative till thoroughly hardened (several weeks for medium to large specimens); then dehydrate in absolute alcohol for one to three days. Make a few incisions here and there in the cuticle with the sharp point of a knife or scalpel, and transfer specimens to xylol or chloroform. When the specimen is thoroughly cleared, remove from the liquid and allow to dry on a piece of filter-paper. The tissues being hardened, the insect will not collapse, and can be mounted in any suitable way required; in the case of green larv{\ae} the colour will have been lost. For larv{\ae} which are semi-transparent in life, the natural appearance can be attained by passing the specimen from chloroform into a solution of paraffin-wax in the same liquid at about 40&#xb0; C. for some hours; then rinse sufficiently in chloroform to remove the film of wax on the cuticle, and dry as before. As considerable quantities of absolute alcohol are required in these processes, it is best prepared by heating crystals of copper sulphate until the anhydrous form is obtained, and then shaking this up in a jar of strong spirit and allowing to settle; the anhydrous copper sulphate will extract all the water from the alcohol, and the decanted remainder will be near enough to absolute for this purpose; the same alcohol can be dehydrated and used again and again.''</p>

<p>Another method of preparing the dry larva is by blowing, the empty skin being distended by air and dried in an oven. Much practice is required in order to preserve the natural shape and size. The necessary apparatus, with full instructions, can be obtained from the dealers in entomologist's requisites.</p>

<p>Again, larv{\ae} may be preserved simply in alcohol, which, however, strongly affects the colour. All preserved larv{\ae} should be accompanied by a description of the colours and markings in life, and in the case of species which appear to be unknown, the description should be as complete as possible, and made from freshly killed specimens.</p>

<p>5. <i>Labelling</i>.&#x2014;Every specimen must bear a label showing the more important data obtained by the collector. The first necessity is the locality, which must be clearly stated; the mere name of a town or village is often difficult to trace by those who may one day have to examine the specimens; so the district must be given, or the latitude and longitude. Next comes the date, the day, or at least the month and year, being stated; any unusual time of flight can also be noted. Next comes the elevation above sea-level, very important in mountain areas. Lastly, the name of the collector is placed at the bottom.</p>

<p>If specimens have been reared the fact must be noted, and the locality where the larva was found must be stated. When insects have been taken <i>in copula</i> this must be noted by writing&#x2014;for example : ``A <i>in cop</i>. with B,'' or ``1 <i>in cop</i>. with 2,'' care being taken not be use the same letter or number for a second pair. When specimens are received by gift or exchange it is usual to add ``Ex coll. ., '' giving name and year.</p>

<p>If any further information is obtained, for which there is no room on the labels, this could be entered in a note-book, and a reference number be marked on the back of the locality label. The following details are often useful :&#x2014;In the case of a mountain, the particular side; in the case of a river, whether right or left bank; season, whether wet or dry, or an extreme of either; prevailing wind; habits of the species, such as flight, feeding-haunts, protective coloration, whether sexes fly together or have similar habits, resting attitude, etc., etc. The inclusion of a sketch-map in the collector's notebook, showing the area, with localities marked, would often be of value.</p>

<p>6. <i>Reference Collections.</i>&#x2014;Collections of Indian butterflies are maintained at the following institutions, all of which would be glad to receive specimens from the less known localities :&#x2014;</p>

<p>The Prince of Wales's Museum, Bombay, under the super-vision of the Bombay Natural History Society.</p>

<p>The Indian Museum, Calcutta (the Zoological Survey of India). This contains the important de Nic\'eville Collection, now incorporated in the main collection.</p>

<p>The Forest Research Institute, Dehra Dun.</p>

<p>The Imperial Agricultural Research Institute, Delhi.</p>

<p>The Madras and Colombo Museums.</p>

<p>The British Museum (Natural History), London, S.W 7. This contains the best preserved and most complete collections of Indian and other butterflies in the world. Application to see the study collections should be made to the Keeper of Entomology.</p>

<p>The Hope Department of Entomology, University Museum, Oxford. This contains large collections illustrating Protective Resemblance and Mimicry, as well as a systematic collection. Application should be made to the Hope Professor.</p>

<p class="order">Order LEPIDOPTERA.</p>

<p class="suborder">Suborder RHOPALOCERA.</p>

<p><center><i>Phylogenetic Scheme of the Families of <span class="smallcaps">Rhopalocera</span> occurring in the Indian Region.</i></center></p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><center><i>Key to Families of Butterflies.</i></center></p>

<table border="1" style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>Fore wing with vein 7 forked. Antenn{\ae} approximate at the base ... ... ...</td>
    <td>2.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Fore wing with all veins arising from the cell. Antenn{\ae} wide apart at base, and often with a hooked club</td>
    <td>Hesperiid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>Hind wing with a precostal vein (except in a few Pierid{\ae})</td>
    <td>3.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Hind wing without a precostal vein.</td>
    <td>Lyc{\ae}nid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3.</td>
    <td>Fore legs fully developed in both sexes</td>
    <td>4.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Fore legs not perfect in one or both sexes</td>
    <td>5.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4.</td>
    <td>Hind wing with vein 1 <i>b</i> absent</td>
    <td>Papilionid{\ae}, p. 54.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Hind wing with vein 1 <i>b</i> present</td>
    <td>Pierid{\ae}, p. 300.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5.</td>
    <td>Fore legs imperfect in both sexes ... ...</td>
    <td>6.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Fore legs imperfect and brush-like in the {\male} : developed for walking in the {\female}</td>
    <td>Riodinid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>6.</td>
    <td>Both wings with the cell closed; cross-veins present.</td>
    <td>7.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Hind wing with the cell open; cross-veins absent (cell slenderly closed in a few cases)</td>
    <td>9.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>7.</td>
    <td>Fore wing with vein 1 <i>a</i> forked with 1 <i>b</i>.</td>
    <td>Danaid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Fore wing with vein 1 <i>a</i> free.</td>
    <td>8.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>8.</td>
    <td>Fore wing with one or more veins (except in a few cases) inflated or swollen at base. Wings normally scaled, not spotted</td>
    <td>Satyrid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Fore wing without any vein inflated at base. Wings thinly scaled and spotted</td>
    <td>Acr{\ae}id{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>9.</td>
    <td>Palpi small, narrow, and sharp in front ...</td>
    <td>Amathusiid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Palpi large, broad, rounded in front. Cell of wing usually open</td>
    <td>Nymphalid{\ae}.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="order">Family PAPILIONID{\AE}. (Fig. 10).</p>

<p><i>Papilionid{\ae}</i>, Leach, 1815, p. 127 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Without prominent sculpturing. Dome-shaped, opaque, smooth or minutely pitted; white, green, orange, or blotched.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Stout, smooth or with one or more pairs of fleshy tubercles on the dorsum, or furnished with hard spines; sometimes with a raised fleshy protuberance (the so-called hood or crest) on the fourth segment, which generally is also thickened above. The prothorax is furnished with a fleshy forked process, which is extrusible and connected with a scent-gland; this organ is called the osmeterium, and emits a strong, somewhat pleasant, but always penetrating odour.</p>

<p>The young larva is furnished with rows of bristle-bearing tubercles, which in the later stages disappear.</p>

<p>``The larva lives free, but some Papilios, by bending over the edges of leaves, make a sort of tunnel in which the larva conceals itself; many forms hide during the day, many also are gregarious'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1908).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Variable in form, but superiorly most often curved backwards, sometimes very strongly so; angulate, with the head truncate or rounded, often bifid; back of abdomen smooth or tuberculate; attached head upwards by a cremaster and by a girdle encircling the thorax and wing-cases. In <i>Parnassius</i> the pupa is enclosed by a loose cocoon placed on the earth or just below it.</p>

<p><i>Imago.</i>&#x2014;Wings very variable in shape. Fore wing (except in <i>Parnassius</i> and <ii>Hypermnestra</ii>) with 12 veins, and in addition a short internal vein, vein 1 <i>a</i>, that invariably terminates on the dorsal (inner) margin. There is also a short transverse vein, the median spur, present near the base of the wing between the cell (median vein) and vein 1 <i>b</i> in all genera except <i>Armandia, Parnassius</i>, and <i>Hypermnestra</i>. Veins 7 and 8 are stalked. Vein 2 rises before the middle of the cell, and four veins rise from the outer lower edge of the cell. Cell closed in both wings. Hind wing very frequently with a tail, which may be slender, or broad and spatulate, but is always an extension of the termen at vein 4. In the genus <i>Armandia</i> the termen is prolonged into tails at the apices of veins 2 and 3 as well as at vein 4. Vein 1 <i>b</i> is absent. A basal cell and a precostal (basal) vein are both present. The inner (abdominal) margin is frequently folded over, and within the fold, in the {\male}, the wing often bears a patch of special scales known as androconia or scent-scales, a mass of woolly pubescence, or a brush of hair often strongly scented. In the males of some species, certain veins on the fore wing above are edged with pilose scent-stripes.</p>

<p>Proboscis well developed. Palpi small and appressed to frons, rarely large and projecting (<i>Teinopalpus</i>). Antenn{\ae} comparatively short, with generally a distinct club; upperside either scaled or naked. Three types of antenna occur : ``The fine sensory hairs beneath and laterally are almost equally distributed over the proximal part of each segment, or there is a cavity on each side which is covered with sensory hairs (recalling the Nymphalids), or there is only one row of such cavities present (recalling the Pierids).''</p>

<p>``Mesothorax very powerful, the sternum completely fused with the episternum, the suture outwardly quite wanting as in the Pierids, which distinguishes these two families from all other Lepidoptera'' (Jordan, 1908).</p>

<p>Fore leg fully developed; fore tibia with spur on the underside. Hind tibia with middle spurs. Claws simple, rarely with a tooth; paronychium and pulvillus wanting.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;{\male}. ``Valve simple, broad or elongate, usually with well-developed chitinized harpe. Tegumen broad, uncus slender, acuminate or curved; side lobes sometimes present (<i>e.g., Parnassius epaphus</i> Boisd.). Scaphium well developed, central lip divided. Vinculum U-shaped. Penis long and stout; anellus lobes often present'' (<i>Mehta</i>, 1933 <i>b</i>).</p>

<p>{\female}. According to Eidmann (1930) the pair of tubes which lead from the bursal sac are of a different form in two groups. In the <i>Aristolochia</i>-feeding species the tubes are curved round in a single spiral at the base. In the tribe <span class="smallcaps">Papilionini</span> these tubes are not so curved, but emerge direct. Each of the three tribes appears to be distinguished by a distinct type of {\female} genital apparatus.</p>

<p><i>Classification</i>.&#x2014;The Papilionid{\ae} are generally considered to be related to the Pierid{\ae}, and to represent a final stage in the development of the <span class="smallcaps">Rhopalocera</span>. The family is here divided into three subfamilies : Papilionin{\ae}, Parnassiin{\ae}, and Zerynthiin{\ae}. The Papilionin{\ae} have been divided into a great number of genera, many of which are untenable as their characters are not constant. The genera required may be reduced to seven : <i>Troides, Polydorus, Chilasa, Papilio, Graphium, Lamproptera,</i> and <i>Teinopalpus</i>.</p>

<p>The Parnassiin{\ae} are more homogeneous, and are represented in the Indian region only by <i>Parnassius</i> and <i>Hypermnestra.</i></p>

<p>The Zerynthiin{\ae} are represented in the Indian region only by the genus <i>Armandia</i>.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The family is found everywhere in the world except in the extreme north and south, and in desert areas. It is as abundant in the tropics of America as it is in the tropics of the Old World. The number of species, excluding <i>Parnassius</i>, inhabiting the Oriental Region from India to the Pacific is 209, of which 81 are recorded from the Indian area, 76 belonging to the true Papilios. Altogether, in the Indian area, 92 species of Papilionid{\ae} are to be distinguished.</p>

<p>The species are distributed as follows :&#x2014;Burma, 65; North-East India, 60; West Himalayas, 33; Peninsular India, 20; Ceylon, 15; North-West India, 15 (including 9 <i>Parnassius</i>); Andaman Islands, 9; Nicobar Islands, 6.</p>

<p>A number of Papilionids occur nowhere else but in the Indian area. <i>Polydorus rhodifer</i> Butl. (Andaman Islands), <i>jophon</i> Gray (Ceylon and Peninsular India), <i>hector</i> L. (Ceylon and Peninsular India), <i>adamsoni</i> Gr.-Sm. (Burma), <i>latreillei</i> Don. (West Himalayas to North-East India and Burma), <i>polla</i> Nicev. (North-East India to Burma); <i>Papilio polymnestor</i> Cram. (Ceylon and Peninsular India), <i>mayo</i> Atks. (Andaman Islands), <i>elephenor</i> Doubl. (Assam), <i>crino</i> Fabr. (Ceylon and Peninsular India), <i>buddha</i> Westw. (Peninsular India), <i>dravidarum</i> W.-M. (Peninsular India), <i>liomedon</i> Mre. (Peninsular India): <i>Graphium gyas</i> Westw. (North-East India to Burma); <i>Teinopalpus imperialis</i> Hope (North-East India to Burma); <i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> Gray (North-West to North-East India), <i>stoliczkanus</i> Gr. Gr. (West Himalayas), <i>hannyngtoni</i> Avin. (Sikkim), <i>acco</i> Gray (West Himalayas to North-East India).</p>

<p>It will be seen from the list above that no fewer than eight out of fourteen species of Papilionin{\ae} are to be found only in Ceylon and Peninsular India. <i>P. polymnestor</i> may possibly be considered as a race of <i>memnon</i>.</p>

<p><center>Keys to Larv{\ae} and Pup{\ae}.</center></p>

<p>These keys are given as a general guide, but our knowledge of the early stages is as yet not sufficiently advanced, nor is the necessary material available, to enable more comprehensive keys to be constructed.</p>

<p><center>1. <i>Keys to Genera.</i></center></p>

<p><center><i>Larv{\ae}.</i></center></p>

<table border="1" style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td><i>Aristolochia</i> feeders, covered with many large hairy tubercles ... ... ...</td>
    <td>[dorus, p. 70. <i>Troides</i>, p. 61, and Poly-</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Never feeding on <i>Aristolochia</i>. Without hairy tubercles ... ... ...</td>
    <td>2.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>With spiny tubercles or short spines</td>
    <td>3.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Without spines, almost smooth ... ... ...</td>
    <td>4.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3.</td>
    <td>A pair of short spines on each of the three thoracic segments and on the last segment. Thorax swollen. Anal segment produced to two short points. Feeding on Anonace{\ae} and Laurace{ae] ... ...</td>
    <td><i>Graphium.</i> p. 200.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Many spiny tubercles. No oblique bands, but spots. Feeding on Laurace{\ae}</td>
    <td><i>Chilasa,</i> p. 106.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4.</td>
    <td>Spotted or with oblique bands. Anal segment not produced to <i>two</i> short points. Feeding chiefly on <i>Citrus</i> ... ... ...</td>
    <td><i>Papilio,</i> p. 120.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Covered with short hairy warts, cylindrical, strongly tapering at both ends. Feeding on <i>Saxifraga, Sedum, Sempervivum, Corydalis, Scabiosa ... ...</i></td>
    <td><i>Parnassius,</i> p. 256.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p><center><i>Pup{\ae}</i></center></p>

<table border="1" style="width:100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>Formed below ground</td>
    <td><i>Hypermnestra,</i> p. 253.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Formed above ground</td>
    <td>2.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>Formed within a cocoon on the ground.</td>
    <td><i>Parnassius</i>, p. 256</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Not formed within a cocoon</td>
    <td>3. [<i>dorus</i>, p. 70.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3.</td>
    <td>Wing-cases strongly projecting ...</td>
    <td><i>Troides</i>, p. 61, and <i>Poly-</i></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Wing-cases not strongly projecting</td>
    <td>4.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>4.</td>
    <td>Stick-like, head without horns, truncate.</td>
    <td><i>Chilasa,</i> p. 106.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Not stick-like, head with two horns, not truncate</td>
    <td>5.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>5.</td>
    <td>Width moderate. Abdomen without dorsal carin{\ae} ... ...</td>
    <td><i>Papilio,</i> p. 120.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Narrow. Abdomen with two dorsal carin{\ae}.</td>
    <td><i>Graphium,</i> p. 200.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p><center>2. <i>Key to some Larv{\ae}</i></center></p>

<p>This was published by T. R. Bell (1911), and is given here as it will be of use to students in Peninsular India; it deals with eighteen species in that area.</p>

<p class="section">Section I. Larv{\ae} when full-grown without conical fleshy tubercles.</p>


<p>
  <ol type="A">
    <li>Full-grown larva with anal segment continued into two short parallel, sharply conical points, close together.
      <ol type="a">
	<li>Full-grown larva having the appearance of being transversely lined, segment 4 coloured differently to the rest.
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Full-grown larva black on dorsum of segment 4 &emsp;&emsp; [(Esp.), p. 207. <i>Graphium nomius</i></li>
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Full-grown larva green on dorsum of segment 4 &emsp;&emsp; [(Cram.), p.212. <i>Graphium antiphates</i></li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
	<li>Full-grown larva more or less concolorous.
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Lateral spine on segment 4 broadened out into a triangular tooth, white, the two connected by a crest or ridge across the dorsum &emsp;&emsp; [(Linn.)<a type="footnote" href="#fn-02"><sup>2</sup></a>, p. 219. <i>Graphium sarpedon</i></li>
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Lateral spines of segment 4 perfectly conical and sharp.
	      <ol type="a">
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Colour green, sullied with blotches of a very slightly darker shade. &emsp;&emsp; [(Linn.),<a type="footnote" href="#fn-02"><sup>2</sup></a> p. 229. <i>Graphium agamemnon</i></li>
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Colour pure green or rusty black. &emsp;&emsp; [(Linn.),<a type="footnote" href="#fn-02"><sup>2</sup></a> p. 225. <i>Graphium eurypylus</i></li>
	      </ol>
	    </li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
      </ol>
  </li>
    <li>Full-grown larva with anal segment not continued into such points, these being represented by more knobs much more widely separated; the segment high, sometimes nearly perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the rest of the body, while that of the A division is nearly continuous in the same plane as that axis.
      <ol type="a">
	<li>Full-grown larva green, a prominent broad, green, whitish or yellow band from dorso-ventral margin of segment 8 running up and back to hind margin of segment 10 on dorsum or in that direction; a triangular whitish patch occupying the whole of the spiracular region of segment 10.
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Full grown larva with a dorsolateral, small, conical, fleshy tubercle on segment 9 ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [Moore, p. 184. <i>Papilio liomedon</i></li>
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Full-grown larva without such tubercles.
	      <ol type="a">
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Band on segments 8, 9 yellow-brown, spotted lighter; this band sometimes broken, irregular ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [p. 187. <i>Papilio demoleus Linn.</i></li>
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Band on segments 8, 9 green, indistinct because of same colour, more or less, as larva ... ... [W.-M., p. 159, <i>Papilio dravidarum</i></li>
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Band on segments 8, 9 with ground-colour white, sullied as a rule with grey or brown.
		  <ol type="a">
		    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>3</sup> &nbsp;</span> Full-grown larva with a lateral ocellus on segment 4 black, a brown line across centre and yellow-brown margin. Above average size ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [Hamps., p. 169. <i>Papilio helenus daksha</i></li>
		    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>3</sup> &nbsp;</span> Full-grown larva with lateral ocellus on segment 4 black, a white line across centre and bordered brown in front, blue behind. Above average size ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [Cram., p. 124. <i>Papilio polymnestor</i></li>
		    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>3</sup> &nbsp;</span> Full-grown larva with lateral ocellus black, not quite as above. Very much smaller &emsp;&emsp; [p. 176. <i>Papilio polytes</i> Linn.,</li>
		  </ol>
		</li>
	      </ol>
	    </li>
	  </ol>	    
	</li>
	<li>Full-grown larva green, not marked by bands.
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Ocellus on segment 4 orange-brown, small and not well developed, the crest joining them white ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [Moore, p. 149. <i>Papilio paris tamilana</i></li>
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> Ocellus on segment 4, otherwise the crest joining them yellow ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [p. 156. <i>Papilio buddha</i> West w.,</li>
	  </ol>
	</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
    </ol>
</p>

<p class="section">Section II. Larv{\ae} with many conical, fleshy, pointed tubercles.</p>

<p>
  <ol type="A">
    <li>Conical tubercles not red-tipped; larva with broad creamy markings ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [p.114. <i>Chilasa clytia</i> (Linn.).</li>
    <li>Conical tubercles red-tipped; larva with no yellow markings; markings, if present, white or pinkish.
      <ol type="a">
	<li>No band on segment 7. &emsp;&emsp; [(Linn.). p. 83. <i>Polydorus hector</i></li>
	<li>A band on segment 7. 
	  <ol type="a">
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> The front margin of segment 2 rose-white ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [<i>diyana</i> (Moore). p. 81. <i>Polydorus jophan pan.</i></li>
	    <li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;">&#x2019; &nbsp;</span> The front margin of segment 2 not white.
	      <ol type="a">
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Colour more or less evenly black. &emsp;&emsp; [(Fabricius), p. 85. <i>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae}</i></li> 
		<li><span style="inline-block;margin-left: -9px !important; margin-left: -15px;"><sup>2</sup> &nbsp;</span> Colour dark rose-brown, marbled satin-grey. &emsp;&emsp; [(Cramer). p. 65. <i>Troides helena minos</i></li> 
	    </ol></li>
	  </ol></li>
      </ol></li>
</ol>
</p>

<p><center><i>Note on some Ceylon Species.</i></center></p>

<p>The larv{\ae} of <i>demoleus, polytes, parinda,</i> and <i>mooreanus</i> are very much alike. They are thus distinguished by Fryer (1911) :&#x2014;</p>

<p>
  <ol type="A">
    <li>Fourth and fifth segments markedly swollen.
      <ol type="a">
	<li>Diagonal bands on segments 8 and 10 mainly brown, and meeting in the dorsal middle line ... ... &emsp;&emsp; [p. 168. <i>mooreanus</i> Roths.,</li>
	<li>Diagonal bands mainly white, not meeting in the middle line ... ... &emsp;&emsp; <i>parinda</i> Moore, p. 127.</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
    <li>Fourth and fifth segments not markedly swollen.
      <ol type="a">
	<li>Caudal tubercles white, much reduced ... ... &emsp;&emsp; <i>romulus</i> Cram., p. 178.</li>
	<li>Caudal tubercles brown, size moderate &emsp;&emsp; <i>demoleus</i> Linn., p. 187.</li>
      </ol>
    </li>
 </ol>
</p>

<p><center><i>Key to Subfamilies.</i></center></p>

<p><center><i>Imagines..</i></center></p>

<table border="1" width="100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>Hind wing with a precostal vein and a basal cell ... ...</td>
    <td>2.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Hind wing with basal cell almost obsolete. Precostal vein short and straight. Fore wing with vein 9 absent ... ...</td>
    <td>Parnassiin{\ae}, p. 253.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>Basal cell large, elongate, longer than broad. Precostal vein curved based.</td>
    <td>Zerynthiin{\ae}, p. 249.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Basal cell small. Precostal vein directed distad. Median spur of fore wing strong.</td>
    <td>Papilionin{\ae}, p. 60.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="family-heading"><center>Subfamily PAPILIONIN{\AE} Swains.</center></p>

<p><center><i>Papilionin{\ae},</i> Swainson, 1840, p. 87 (part.); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 107.</center></p>

<p><center><i>Key to Tribes.</i></center></p>

<table border="1" width="100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>Fore wing with vein 11 not anastomosed with vein 12. Tarsal claws without a tooth ...</td>
    <td>2.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Fore wing with vein 11 anastomosed with vein 12 (except in <i>G, payeni</i> and <i>G. gyas,</i> and in <i>Lamproptera</i>, all of which have a tooth on the tarsal claw) ... ...</td>
    <td>Graphiini, p. 199.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>Larva feeding on <i>Aristolochia.</i> Thorax or abdomen red below. Hind wing with an anal fold bearing a scent-organ (weak in some cases, e. g., <i>hector</i>) ... ...</td>
    <td>Troiidini, p. 61.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Larva not feeding on <i>Aristolochia</i>. Hind wing without a scent-organ. Thorax or abdomen not red below (except in <i>P. bootes</i>).</td>
    <td>3.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>3.</td>
    <td>Hind wing with abdominal margin curved downwards, forming a groove beneath. Frons not projecting. Palpus not long.</td>
    <td>Papilionini, p. 105.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td>Hind wing without an abdominal fold. Frons projecting. Palpus very long</td>
    <td>Teinopalpini, p. 246.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="section">Tribe I. TROIIDINI.</p>

<p>The species of this group are known as the <i>Aristolochia</i> Papilios on account of the larva feeding almost entirely upon plants of the family Aristolochiace{ae}.</p>

<p>``Antenna without scales, except dorsally at the base; beneath, on both sides, with a sharply defined sensory cavity on each segment. The outer ventral row of spines of the tarsi not separated from the dorsal spines by a spineless longitudinal depression.</p>

<p>``Larva densely covered with very short hairs, only the head, the prothoracic sclerite, and legs shiny; each segment with a belt of fleshy tubercles or processes which bear hairs, but not strong spines.</p>

<p>``Pupa dorsally strongly incurved before the middle and posteriorly arched; wing-cases strongly projecting; head truncate, with distinct horns; on the abdomen dorsally a row of humps or lobes on each side'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1908).</p>

<p>The Troiidini comprise the genera <i>Troides H\dd{u}bn. and <i>Polydorus</i> Swains.</i></p>

<p><center><i>Key to Genera of</i> Troiidini.</center></p>

<table border="1" width="100%">
  <tr>
    <td>1.</td>
    <td>Both wings large and ample. Hind wing with well-developed scent-brushes. Vein 11 of fore wing arising from a point opposite vein 2. Head black, collar red. {\male} claspers well developed ... ...</td>
    <td>[p. 61. <span class="smallcaps">Troides H\dd{u}bn.,</span></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>2.</td>
    <td>Smaller species. Vein 11 of fore wing arising from a point opposite vein 3. Head red, at least in front</td>
    <td>[p. 70. <span class="smallcaps">Polydorus</span> Swain.,</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<p class="family-heading">Genus TROIDES H\dd{u}bner.</p>

<p><i>Troides</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 88; rothschild, 1895, p. 182; Roths. &amp; Jordan, 1906, p. 433; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 143 (type, <i>helena</i> Linn., 1758).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera</i>, Boisduval, 1832, p. 33; Moore, 1881 <i>a</i> p. 154; id., 1902, pp. 138-40; Bingham, 1907, pp. 10-11; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 143 (type, <i>priamus</i> Linn., 1758).</p>

<p><i>Papilio,</i> Linn{\ae}us (part.) Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 12.</p>

<p>Type, <i>helena</i> Linn.</p>

<p><i>Troides</i> is the oldest name for a group of Papilios formerly called <i>Ornithoptera,</i> and popularly known as bird-winged butterflies. They are distinguished by their great size, being among the giants of the butterflies, and some species are remarkable for their brilliant colouring. They form a prominent feature of the butterfly fauna of the Malay islands and New Guinea, extending to Australia and the Pacific. Only three species occur in the Indian area; they are members of the black and yellow group.</p>

<p>Morphologically there is not a great difference between this group and <i>Polydorus</i>. The subcostal vein of the fore wing is given off nearer the base and is longer. The claspers of the male are above the average size for the family, and the scent-brushes in the fold of the hind wing are very strongly developed.</p>

<p>The larva, as one would expect, grows to a much larger size than in other Papilios. It agrees with <i>Polydorus</i> in being furnished with many hairy tubercles or spines, and in feeding upon plants of the family Aristolochiace{\ae}.</p>

<p>The pupa, unlike that of other groups of the family, is sustained by separate lateral threads attached by a tubercle on each side, and not by a loop round the middle.</p>

<p>Key to Species of Troides</p>

<p>1. Fore wing above with no prominent pale area round the end of the cell. ... ...</p>

<p>2</p>

<p>Fore wing above with a prominent yellow area (white in {\female}) round end of cell. ... ...</p>

<p><i>amphrysus fuficollis</i></p>

<p>2. Hind wing above without any proximal black suffusion to the marginal spots in areas 2 to 4. {\female} without white area in cell of fore wing.</p>

<p>[(Butl.), p. 69. <i>helena</i> (Linn.), p. 62</p>

<p>Hind wing above with prominent proximal black suffusion to the marginal spots in areas 2 to 4. {\male} with area 7 yellow to the marginal spot. {\female} with area 1 <i>b</i> black at the base; a white area in cell of fore wing</p>

<p><i>{\ae}acus</i> (Feld.), p. 68.</p>

<p><b>Troides helena</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p><i>Imago.</i>&#x2014;Fore wing mostly black. Hind wing in the {\male} largely amber-yellow; in the {\female} with large black spots or with only a small amber-coloured area.</p>

<p>{\male}. Abdomen above brown, narrowly ringed with yellow, laterally and beneath entirely yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. Abdomen black-brown, at the sides a broad yellow stripe, the posterior ventral stripes partly yellow, or the whole underside yellow with black spots. Hind wing usually without a discal yellow spot before vein 7; the cell-spot small and irregular, or longer posteriorly than anteriorly.</p>

<p><i>Early stages.</i>&#x2014;Described under <i>darsius</i> and <i>minos.</i></p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Described under <i>darsius, minos,</i> and <i>cerberus.</i></p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The most widely distributed species of the genus, ranging from Hainan and <span class="smallcaps">Northern India</span> to New Guninea.</p>

<p>Five subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>1 <i>a</i> <b>Troides helena darsius</b> (Gray). (Fig. 11, <i>a&#x2014;c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio darsius</i>, Gray, 1852, p. 5 (Ceylon); Bingham, 1907, pp. 17-18; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 18, t. 9 <i>b, c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera darsius</i>, Horsfield &amp; Moore, 1857, p. 87, pl. 2, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa); Moore, 1881 <i>a,</i> p. 155, pl. 55, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}, larva, pupa); Gosse, 1883, p. 286, pl. 26, figs. 8-11 (genitalia); Lathy, 1902, p. 2.</p>

<p><i>Troides helena darsius</i>, Evans, 1924, p. 23; id., 1927, p. 26; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Troides darsius</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 203; Moore, 1903, p. 140, pl. 418, fig. 1 (larva, pupa), 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\femal}); Poulton, 1921, p. xei; Williams, 1927, p. 19.</p>

<p><i>Pompeoptera darsius,</i> Rippon, 1906-12, p. 37, pl. 60, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}), 3, 4 ({\female}), 5 ({\male} neuration), 6 ({\female} neuration), p. 89, pl. 59, figs. 22, 26 (scales).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera cambyses,</i> Ehrman, 1904, p. 215.</p>

<p><i>Papilio darsius</i> f. <i>cambyses,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 18; Evans, 1923, p. 231; id., 1927, p. 26; Holland, 1927, p. 324, pl. 26, fig. 1 ({\male} type).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera isis</i>, Ehrman, 1925, p. 89.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i>.&#x2014;Fore wing rich velvety black with indistinct pale vein-stripes. Hind wing black, with a very broad, discal, slightly curved, silky yellow band or patch that extends beyond the cell from areas 2 to 7, and is composed of elongate, outwardly emarginate yellow markings that are divided only by the black veins. In most specimens the inner margin of this band crosses the apex of the cell, but in many the cell is entirely black.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside.</i>&#x2014;Fore wing with vein-stripes more distinctly marked.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i>.&#x2014;Fore wing with the white stripes at vein 2 far removed from the cell. Hind wing with a great extent of black; the black discal spots touch one another. Area 1 with a pale dusky-white patch in the middle; area 7 with an inner and an outer yellow spot. Cell entirely black or nearly so, rarely with the yellow spot. Cell entirely black or nearly so, rarely with the yellow extended into the apex.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 165&#x2013;175 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;The harpe (fig. 11, <i>b, c</i>) is a broad arm ending in a spatulate and toothed plate armed with 8 or 10 large marginal teeth.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``Cylindrical, dull purple-brown, with two dorsal rows and anterior and lateral rows of fleshy tubercles, those on the eight segment and a streak from its base to lower end of seventh segment being pale pink; between the tubercles are dark brown streaks'' (<i>Moore</i>).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Pale purplish-ochreous, bent backwards anteriorly; thorax conical, the top flattened and its sides angles; wing-cases dilated and flattened laterally in the middle, their outer edge acute; two middle segments of abdomen with a dorsal pair of conical prominences'' (<i>Moore</i>).</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;Three forms are distinguished, according to the pattern of the hind wing :&#x2014;</p>

<p>1. Hind wing with black spots on the yellow distal area. {\male} <b>f. cambyses</b> Ehrm.</p>

<p>2. Cell-patch of hind wing large, reaching veins 2 and 7 {\male} <b>f. isis</b> Ehrm.</p>

<p>3. No cell-spot on hind wing above, though sometimes a small one below. In the {\male} the patch in area 2 of hind wing is reduced proximally, and its posterior edge is usually shorter than the anterior edge along vein 2.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2004;Common in hilly country, but occurs also in the plains in open and wooded districts. Imago fond of feeding at heliotrope.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon.</span></p>

<p><b>1 <i>b.</i> Troides helena minos</b> (Cramer). (Pl. I, fig. 1, larva; fig. 2, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio minos,</i> Cramer, 1779, p. 4, pl. 195, fig. A (<i>Patria falsa</i>); Bell, 1911. pp. 1126-30; Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Fergusson, 1891, p. 445; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 25.</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera minos,</i> Aitken, 1887, p. 35; Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890. p. 361 (biology); Moore, 1902, p. 142, pl. 419, figs. 1 (larga, pupa), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Evans, 1923; p. 231; id., 1927, p. 26.</p>

<p><i>Troides minos,</i> Rothschild, 1895, pp. 203&#x2013;5.</p>

<p><i>Pompeoptera minos,</i> Rippon, 1902, p. 13; id., 1906&#x2013;1912, pp. 39&#x2013;41, pl. 47, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}), 3, 4 ({\female}), 6 ({\male} neuration), 5 ({\female} neuration), p. 89, pl. 59, figs. 15, 25, 29 (scales).</p>

<p><i>Troides helena minos,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera nomis,</i> Ehrman, 1921, p. 19.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside.</i>&#x2014;Fore wing with veins 2, 3, 4 distinctly edged with whitish, these stripes continued to the cell and there united. Hind wing golden, the inner area black as far as the cell, and a broad outer marginal black border.</p>

<p><i>Underside.</i>&#x2014;Fore wing vein-stripes much more prominent than above.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside.</i>&#x2014;Fore wing with prominent grey-white vein-stripes, which extend to the cell and are there united the distal half of the cell surrounded with white also on the inside. Hind wing golden, with black inner area, and a row of large discal spots. The broad black outer border is strongly convex between the veins. Inner area grey in the centre and at the margin.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 140&#x2013;180 mm.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.&#x2014;Head black. Segment 2 with a lateral fleshy tubercle, and a shorter marginal one. Each of segments 3 to 14 with a subdorsal fleshy conically produced tubercle. A row of shorter spiracular tubercles on 2 to 14. Legs shiny black. Spiracles shiny black. Colour of body velvety rosy-black, marbled with satiny grey or black. On segments 7 and 8 is a diagonal rosy-white band reaching from base of subdorsal tubercle of segment 8 to base of spiracular tubercle of segment 7. All the pointed tubercles are of the same colour as the body with bright red tips. Osmeterium orange. Length 90 mm. : greatest width 15 mm.; greatest height (dorsum to venter) 14 mm.; length of the longest tubercle 14 mm. (from <i>Bell,</i> 1911).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Pink-brown or green, with saddle and back of abdomen orange or yellow, the whole surface reticulated with brown. Antenn{\ae} and wings bordered with a thin line of black and another of red or pink. Head quadrate, with a short, triangular, round-topped projection, pointing sideways. Segment 2 with a carination separating it from segment 1. Thorax convex, nearly hemispherical, with a strong dorsal carination. Segment 4 is on the same plane as the back slope of thorax. Abdominal segments 8 to 10 with a subdorsal, laterally much flattened, contorted, pointed tooth, those on 8 and 9 very large, those on 7 being hardly developed. From the base of each tooth on segment 9 a ridge runs to the base of the short cremaster. Length 50 mm.; breadth 20&#x2013;25 mm.; height 15 mm. (from <i>Bell</i>, 1911).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell,</i> 1911).&#x2014; rare, and both sexes equally common. In North Kanara common during the rainy season (from June onwards). The butterfly has a slow flight, and usually flies high above the trees; it frequents shady walks and glades in the jungle.</p>

<p>The eggs are laid on the upperside of a leaf, sometimes on the stem, and only one is deposited at a time. The butterfly hovers whilst ovipositing. The young larva lives on the underside of a leaf, and later on it is found on the stems and stalks, rarely on the upperside of leaves. It is much parasitized by a small Braconid which lays many eggs. The larva has been reared on  <i>Aristolochia indica</i> Linn., also on <i>Bragantia wallichii</i> R. Br.</p>

<p>The pupa, when touched, makes a distinct, somewhat hissing sound, which is probably caused by the friction of the abdominal segments against each other.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span>, from sea-level to 6,000 ft. and more.</p>

<p><b>1 <i>c</i>, Troides helena cerberus</b> (C. &amp; R. Felder).</p>

<p><i>Papilio cerberus</i>, C. &amp; R. Felder, 1865 <i>a</i>, p. 291; id., 1864 <i>b</i>, p. 19; Bingham, 1907, pp. 14, 15, pl. 11, fig. 82 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera cerberus</i>, Swinhoe, 1893, p. 311; Moore, 1902, p. 145, pl. 420, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Troides cerberus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, pp. 219-21; Kirby, 1896, p. 264 (larva), p. 265 (pupa).</p>

<p><i>Pompeoptera cerberus,</i> Rippon, 1906&#x2013;12, pp. 55-6, pl. 57, figs. 1&#x2013;4 ({\male}), 6, 8, 9 ({\female}), p. 89, pl. 59. figs. 4, 6, 11 (scales).</p>

<p><i>Papilio helena cerberus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24.</p>

<p><i>Troides helena cerberus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 231; id., 1927, p. 26; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera pompeus</i>, Wood-Mason and de Nic\'eville (<i>non</i> Cramer, 1775), 1887, p. 373; Watson, 1888, p. 26.</p>

<p><i>Papilio helena cerberus</i> {\male} f. <i>eumagos</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42, pl. 1, fig. A 1.</p>

<p><i>Papilio helena cerberus</i> {\female} f. <i>azelia</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24.</p>

<p><i>Papilio helana cerberus</i> {\female} f. <i>gypsothelia</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with or without distinct vein-stripes. Typical form beneath, below the cell, with a white or yellowish stripe towards the base; vein-stripes distinct though short, ofter present also above. Hind wing rich silky yellow, the inner area, the apical half obliquely of area 1, the outer margin broadly, base of cell and costal area up to and including basal half of area 7 velvety black; veins narrowly black; inner margin of terminal black border produced inwards into prominent cone-shaped markings between the veins. One or more post-discal black spots. Scent-fold with a dense mass of buff-white scented cottony pubescence.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\female}. Fore wing vein-stripes broader and more prominent. Hind wing basal and costal black occupies fully one-third of the cell, the area above it and above vein 7, interrupted, however, in area 7 near apex of wing, by a transverse yellow mark, which is sometimes partly obsolete; a post-discal series of large oval black spots, those in areas 2 and 3 often joined on the upperside to the cone-shaped terminal black marks; inner margin more broadly black.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 150&#x2013;180 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;Both sexes occur in two forms :&#x2014;</p>

<p>{\male} <b>f. cerberus</b> Feld., as described above.</p>

<p>{\male} <b>eumagos</b> Jord.&#x2014;Fore wing without distinct vein-stripes, or these are submarginal; subbasal stripe behind the cell absent. The golden subcostal patch of hind wing is reduced to a submarginal spot.</p>

<p>{\female} <b>f. azelia</b> Jord.&#x2014;Fore wing without or with weak vein-stripes.</p>

<p>{\female} <b>f. gypsothelia</b> Jord.&#x2014;Fore wing with the stripes on veins 2 and 3 reaching the cell, and the white at apex of cell extending nearly or quite to the point of origin of vein 3.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Common up to 3,000 feet from spring till autumn. The light-striped specimens appear mostly to come from hibernated pup{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Habital.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Orissa</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>. It occurs also in Tong-king, the Malay Peninsula, the Natuna Islands, and Borneo.</p>

<p><b>1 <i>d</i>. Troides helena heliconoides</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera heliconoides</i>, Moore, 1877, p. 592 (Andamans).</p>

<p><i>Papilio helena heliconoides</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24.</p>

<p><i>Troides helena heliconoides</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 231; id., 1927, p. 26; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera heliaconoides</i>, Wood-Mason and de Nic\'eville, 1880, p. 237; Gosse, 1883, pp. 281, 290, 339, pl. xxvii. figs. 3&#x2013;4 (genitalia); Moore, 1902, p. 147, pl. 421, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, 1 <i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio heliaconoides,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 15.</p>

<p><i>Papilio helena heliconoides</i> {\female} f. <i>aphnea,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24.</p>

<p><i>Papilio helena heliconoides</i> {\female} f. <i>rhyparia,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 24.</p>

<p>A smaller race than <i>cerberus.</i></p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing black. Hind wing yellow for the greater part. The gold spot placed before the subcostal always large, distally rather suddenly widened to the costa and here mostly enclosing a black spot, the tooth of the gold area placed before vein 4 shorter than the one below this vein. The black marginal band below, before the anal angle, bearing short yellow longitudinal stripes.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> almost pure black, or with very sharp, narrow, almost pure white vein-stripes, which do not extend so near to the margin as in <i>cerberus,</i> the stripe placed below vein 2 short or absent. The black discal spots of the hind wing separated from one another, the first one not more than twice the size of the second; the last spot of this row (placed below vein 2) stands in or distally to the middle of vein 2 and beneath at least very little, if at all, proximally to the preceding black discal spot; the posterior teeth of the gold area mostly continued to the fringe-spots by yellow-grey scaling.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : 130&#x2013;160 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.&#x2014;Harpe similar to <i>darsius,</i> thicker, of more even width, and with about fourteen teeth (<i>Gosse,</i> 1883).</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;The {\female} occurs in two forms :&#x2014;</p>

<p>{\female} <b>f. phyparia</b> Jord.&#x2014;Fore wing above almost pure black.</p>

<p>{\female} <i>f. aphnea</i> Jord.&#x2014;Fore wing above with sharp white vein-stripes.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>1 e. <b>Troides helena ferrari</b> Tytler.</p>

<p><i>Troides ferrari,</i> Tytler, 1926, pp. 248&#x2013;9, {\female} (Gt. Nicobars).</p>

<p><i>Troides helena ferrari</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with the marginal spot in area 2 merger with the black inner area.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing vein-stripes broad and bluish-white. Hind wing with post-discal spots contiguous to one another and to the marginal spots. Yellow cell-patch oval, proximally narrowed. The yellow spot in area 6 very small and adjoins vein 6, but not vein 7; the yellow spot in area 1 is as long as the cell-spot. The yellow spots in 2 to 5 are less than half the distance from the end of cell to outer margin.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : 140&#x2013;170 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Nicobar Islands.</span> Perhaps the only {\male} at present known is in the Ferrar Collection. There are 3 {\female}{\female} in the British Museum.</p>

<p><b>Troides {\ae}acus</b> (Felder).</p>

<p>This species is distinguished from <i>helena</i> (Linn.), by the {\male} hind wing having some black scaling in the anal area, and in the {\female} the anal third of the wing is much shaded with black.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Common in many districts from about 800 to 3,500 feet.</p>

<p><i>Early stages.</i>&#x2014;Unknown.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Himalayas</span> and Malacca to West China and Formosa. Only the nominotypical race occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>2. <b>Troides {\ae}acus {\ae}acus</b> (C. &amp; R. Felder).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera {\ae}acus, C. &amp; R. Felder).</i></p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera {\ae}acus,</i> C. &amp; R. Felder, 1860, p. 225; Moore, 1902, p. 148, pl. 442, figs. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Troides {\ae}acus,</i> Rothschild, 1895, pp. 223&#x2013;4; Evans, 1923, p. 231; id., 1927, p. 26; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43.</p>

<p><i>Pompeoptera {\ae}acus,</i> Rippon, 1906, pp. 35&#x2013;6, 41, 64, 110, 128, pl. 35 A, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}), figs. 3, 4 <i>a</i> ({\female}=type), figs. 5 ({\male} neuration), fig. 6 ({\female} neuration. p. 90, pl. 59, fig. 33 (scales).</p>

<p><i>Papilio {\ae}acus,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 15.</p>

<p><i>Papilio {\ae}acus {\ae}acus,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 25; Seitz, 1909, p. 8, t. 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera rhadamanthus</i>, Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville (non <i>rhadamanthus</i> Lue.). 1887, p. 373; Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 438; Manders, 1890, p. 535; Watson, 1891, p. 53; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 311.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing narrow, semitransparent at the veins; vein-stripes prominent. Hind wing golden, the last three projections of the black marginal border surrounded with black scaling placed on the golden area; sometimes a black discal spot placed behind vein 2. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing without the black scaling in areas 2, 3, and 4. Abdomen above ringed with yellow.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing above black-brown with very broad and prominent grey vein-stripes extending well into the cell; the cell inside margined with white-grey at least to the half, commonly also the whole cell of this colour. Hind wing with large black wedge-shaped spots and deeply incised marginal border; anal third of wing more or less strongly shaded with black. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with whiter and still more prominent vein-stripes. Abdomen above ringed with yellow.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 119&#x2013;188 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;In North India the butterfly is very common in hot valleys. It sails slowly round flowering trees, but also visits flowering shrubs, and can sometimes be caught with the hand when it is hovering before a flower. In Tavoy it is common from October to June at all elevations in heavy forest.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, as far as Mergui. It occurs also in West China.</p>

<p><b>Troides amphrysus</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with yellow or grey-yellow vein-stripes, the posterior ones submarginal, the anterior ones extending to the cell; apex of cell, at least beneath, with a grey-yellow spot. Hind wing golden, outer black border very narrow at the veins.</p>

<p>Abdomen yellow, the first segment above black, the upperside often blackened laterally and at the tip.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing with vein-stripes, of which the posterior ones are submarginal. The white-grey cell-spot extends to the point of origin of vein 10. Hind wing with large black discal spots. Abdomen above black-brown or grey-yellow.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;Harpe a thick curved trapezoidal plate, its two inner angles being two short stout points; from its base arises a long curved filiform process (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883, p. 292, pl. xxvii, figs. 9&#x2013;11).</p>

<p><i>Early stages.</i>&#x2014;These are known only from Sumatra.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;In Sumatra it flies all the year round, and is especially fond of visiting the flowers of <i>Poinciana pulcherrima.</i></p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The species ranges from the <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Archipelago</span> to Malacca, Sumatra and its western islands, Java, Borneo, and Banguey.</p>

<p><b>3. Troides amphrysus ruficollis</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><i>Ornithoptera ruficollis,</i> Butler, 1877, p. 552 ({\male}, <i>non</i> {\female}); Distant, 1885, p. 328, pl. 27, fig. 1 ({\male}), p. 329, fig. 107 ({\female}), pl. 27 <i>a</i>, fig. 1 ({\female} var.).</p>

<p><i>Troides amphrysus</i> ab. <i>ruficollis,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Papilio amphrysus ruficollis,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 28.</p>

<p><i>Troides amphrysus ruficollis,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 231; id., 1927, p. 26; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing upperside black with deep blue sheen; dark yellow vein-stripes over the apical post-cellular area and near the margin on veins 1 <i>a</i>, 2, and 3.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing upperside with grey and prominent vein-stripes in the apical post-cellular area; the short stripes on veins 1 <i>a</i>, 2, and 3 yellow or grey. A grey patch in the end of the cell. Hind wing largely yellow, with a post-discal row of five large rounded black patches in areas 2 to 6.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 130&#x2013;160 mm.</p>

<p>``<i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Yellow.</p>

<p>``<i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Coffee-brown, the fleshy processes of the prothorax and the next three segments thickened at the tip and curved posteriorly, whilst the processes of the other segments are inclined forwards.</p>

<p>``<i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Yellow. Makes a loud noise by rubbing the abdominal segments together when it is disturbed. The pupal stage lasts 26&#x2013;29 days'' (<i>Martin</i>, quoted by Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;Southern part of the <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Archipelago</span>; also extending to Malacca and Sumatra.</p>

<p>Genus <b>POLYDORUS</b> Swainson.</p>

<p><i>Polydorus,</i> Swainson, 1833, pl. 101; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 144 (type, <i>polydorus</i> Linn., 1763).</p>

<p><i>Byasa,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 258; id., 1902. p. 158.</p>

<p><i>Panosmia,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 374.</p>

<p><i>Pangerana,</i> Moore, 1886, p. 51 (type, <i>varuna</i>).</p>

<p><i>Tros,</i> Kirby, 1896, p. 305 (type, <i>hector</i> L.); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 41, 43.</p>

<p><i>Losaria,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 184 (type, <i>coon</i>).</p>

<p><i>Balignina</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 187 (type, <i>neptunus</i>).</p>

<p><i>Polydorus</i> is the oldest name for the group formerly called <i>Tros</i> Kirby and <i>Byasa</i> Moore, a genus of <i>Aristolochia</i>-feeding Papilios, which resemble <i>Troides</i> in many ways. The species are always much smaller, and vein 11 of the fore wing is usually given off from the cell at a point opposite vein 3, and therefore is shorter than it is in <i>Troides.</i></p>

<p>As in <i>Troides</i> both larva and imago possess distasteful qualities which cause them to be avoided by insectivorous animals and birds. In this connection it is of interest to note that some species are copied in their general facies by  species of true <i>Papilio,</i> and especially is this the case with the females (e.g., <i>polytes</i> Linn.). The resemblance between <i>Polydorus hector</i> Linn. and the {\female} of <i>Papilio polytes romulus</i> Crm. is very striking. Similar cases of resemblance occur among the American species of <i>Polydorus</i>. It is to be noted that although <i>Troides</i> is very close to <i>Polydorus</i> no mimetic form of that genus is known.</p>

<p><i>Key to Groups and Speices of</i> Polydorus.</p>

<p>A. Tail absent or short and pointed. Hind wing of {\male} with well-developed scent-organ in a fold of the inner margin.</p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Nox</span> Group, p. 72.</p>

<p>1. Hind wing above without any pale area.</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with a pale distal area...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing with the fold roundd, and lower half of scent-area white. {\female} brown above ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 72. <i>aidoneus</i> (Doubl.),</p>

<p>Hind wing with the fold square, scent-area with only a small white patch. Cell above darker and without blue sheen. {\female} shining black ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 73. <i>varuna varuna</i> (White).</p>

<p>3. Hind wing above in {\male} with submarginal white patches in areas 2 to 4. {\female} with large white discal area from inner margin to area 5 ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 74. <i>varuna zaleucus</i>(Hew.),</p>

<p>Hind wing above with distal half blue-grey, with black spots. Abdomen yellow, black-spotted ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 75. <i>sycorax</i> (Gr.-Sm.).</p>

<p>B. Tail spatulate, with very thin base. {\male} scent-fold only weakly developed. Anal claspers not touching each other above.</p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Coon</span> Group, p. 75.</p>

<p>1. Tail black</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Tail red</p>

<p><i>rhodifer</i> (Butl.), p. 79.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing above without a white spot.</p>

<p>[(Gu\'er.), p. 76.</p>

<p>Abdomen with greyish-yellow distal half.</p>

<p><i>neptunus neptunus</i></p>

<p>Hind wing above with white spots.</p>

<p>Abdomen red and black ... ... ...</p>

<p><i>coon</i> (Fabr.), p. 76</p>

<p>C. With or without a tail. Cell of hind wing about three times as long as broad. {\male} scent-fold weakly developed or absent, without scent-wool. Analclaspers aborted.</p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Hector</span> Group, p. 79.</p>

<p>1. Hind wing above with at least outer half of cell white. ... ...</p>

<p><i>jophon</i> (Gray), p. 80.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with at most a small white spot in the cell ... ... ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing above with a discal and a sub-marginal row of red spots ... ...</p>

<p><i>hector</i> (Linn.), p. 83.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with white discal spots in areas 2 to 5 or some absent ...</p>

<p>[p. 85. <i>aristolochi{\ae}</i> (Fabr.),</p>

<p>D. Hind wing elongate, with spatulate tail. {\male} scent-fold and scent-wool strongly developed.</p>

<p>[p. 89. <span class="smallcaps">Latreillei</span> Group,</p>

<p>1. Hind wing above with a white discal spot or spots ... ... ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Hind wing above without white discal spots ... ... ...</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing above with a submarginal spot in area 5 ... ... ...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>Hind wing above without a submarginal spot in area 5</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>3. Tail black ...</p>

<p><i>adamsoni</i> (Gr.-Sm.),</p>

<p>Tail red-tipped.</p>

<p>4. [p. 90.</p>

<p>4. Fringe black from tornus to vein 3</p>

<p><i>latreillei</i> (Don.), p. 90.</p>

<p>Fringe red from tornus to vein 3</p>

<p><i>polla</i> (de Nic\'ev.), p. 92.</p>

<p>Tail black</p>

<p><i>nevilli</i> (W.-M.), p. 93.</p>

<p>Tail red-tipped.</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>6. Hind wing above with the submarginal spot in area 4 red ...</p>

<p>[p. 94. <i>philoxenus</i> (Gray),</p>

<p>Hind wing above with the submarginal spot in area 4 white for the grater part.</p>

<p><i>dasarada</i> (Mre.). p. 98.</p>

<p>7. Upperside unmarked. Tail tipped with red below ... ...</p>

<p><i>crassipes</i> (Ob.), p. 101.</p>

<p>Tail black. Hind wing below with submarginal red spots to area 6.</p>

<p><i>plutonius</i> (Ob.), p. 102.</p>

<p><i>Nox</i> Group.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing elongate; coste slightly arched, twice the length of dorsum, apex rounded; termen straight in {\male}, slightly convex in {\female}, dorsum straight; cell long, well over half the length of wing, veins 10 and 11 close together from apical half of subcostal. Hind wing elongate; costa short, slightly curved; termen long, convex, broadly scalloped; dorsum with the abdominal fold in the {\male} closed, straight; veins 4 and 5 closely approximate or from a point. {\male} sex-mark, abdominal fold very large in two out of the three Indian forms, cut square on its lower margin, its dorsal margin fringed with long hairs, beneath the fold a mass of specialized scent-scales; anal valves short, convex, Antenn{\ae} a little less than half length of fore wing; club long, narrow, gradual in both sexes.</p>

<p><b>4. Polydorus aidoneus</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aidoneus,</i> Doubleday, 1845, p. 178; Rothschild, 1895, pp. 257&#x2013;8; Bingham, 1907, pp. 25&#x2013;6; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 29&#x2013;30, t. 17 <i>b, c</i> ({\male}{\female}); id., 1915, p. 273; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Pangerana aidoneus,</i> Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 592; Moore, 1902, p. 154, pl. 424, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa aidoneus,</i> Evans. 1923, p. 231.</p>

<p><i>Tros aidoneus,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 43.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing bluish-black with indistinct vein-stripes. Hind wing unmarked. The white scent-patch in the fold is pink or red on its marginal edge, abdomen pink or red laterally.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> grey-brown, the fore wing with dark stripes between the veins. Abdomen with a broad white lateral stipe.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 112&#x2013;162 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Frequents the deep shadow of forest trees, which overhang rivers, and has a slow and graceful flight.</p>

<p><i>Habit.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span>; occurring also in Tong-king, Hainan, and South China. In Sikkim it is not rare up to about 5,000 feet from April to November.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus varuna</b> (White).</p>

<p>This species resembles <i>aidoneus</i>, from which it can be distinguished in the {\male} by the black-brown scent-fold that on the underside has a small pale grey spot and long fringes. The fore wing beneath is bluish-black in the basal half. {\female} with a large pale posterior patch on the fore wing, except in <i>zaleucus</i>, which is easily recognized by the white area on the hind wing. The hind wing is blue-black, with more metallic-blue than in <i>aidoneus</i>.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Commoner than <i>aidoneus.</i> It ranges from <span class="smallskip">Sikkim</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Archipelago</span>, the Malay Peninsula, Tong-king, and Siam.</p>

<p>Three subspecies occur within the Indian area. Among these is here included <i>zaleucus</i> Hew., usually treated as a distinct species.</p>

<p><b>5 <i>a</i>. Polydorus varuna astorian</b> (Westwood). (Pl. III, fig. 2, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio astorion,</i> Westwood, 1842<i>a,</i> p. 37; id., 1844, p. 69, pl. 66, fig. 1; de Nic\'eville, 1881, p. 59; Rothschild, 1895, p. 260; Bingham, 1907, pp. 25&#x2013;6; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Pangerana astorion,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 375; Moore, 1902, p. 153, pl. 423, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio varuna astorion,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 30, t. 19 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Byasa varuna</i> var. <i>astorion,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 231.</p>

<p><i>Tros varuna astorion,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 43.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> as already described under the species, except that the cell of the hind wing is without a blue sheen and is darker than the rest of the wing. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with some whitish distal scaling in areas 1 <i>b</i> and 1 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a large whitish to greenish-grey patch, sometimes indistinct, below vein 2. Hind wing with the cell dark, though less marked than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> resembles the {\male}, but the white posterior patch is more prominent.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 88&#x2013;136 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;A {\male} and 2 {\female}{\female} in the British Museum show a transition to <i>zaleucus</i> Hew :&#x2014;</p>

<p>{\male}. Hind wing below with a narrow white post-discal band from vein 5 to 1, dusted with black, and forming three conical spots shaped as in <i>zaleucus,</i> but with only the narrow inner part defined. Ataran Valley, Tenasserim, 900 feet, March 1925 (<i>Archbald</i>).</p>

<p>{\female}. Hind wing on both sides with white markings somewhat as in <i>zaleucus</i>, but not so large and slightly dusted with black; much more sharply defined below, the stripes on veins 2 to 4 reaching the margin. One specimen collected by Archbald at Kanbauk, in Tavoy, April 1923. A second {\female} without precise locality (<i>Dr. Lidderdale</i>, 1857).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2014;Commoner than <i>aidoneus,</i> and in Sikkim occurs from quite low elevations in the Terai up to 7,000 feet from March to December. Its almost uniform dark colour renders it inconspicuous in the jungle, and it is therefore difficult to account for its being further protected by a disagreeable smell and probably taste. Wood-Mason has recorded that the females have a strong and disgustingly rank musky odour.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Tavoy</span></p>

<p>5<i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus varuna zaleucus</b> (Hewitson).</p>

<p><i>Papilio zaleucus,</i> Hewitson, 1865, Pap. pl. 7, figs. 24 ({\male}), 25 ({\female}) (Burma); Rothschild, 1895, p. 261; Bingham, 1907, pp. 2, 27; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 30, t. 17 <i>e</i>; id., 1915, p. 273.</p>

<p><i>Pangerana zaleucus</i>, Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 436; Moore, 1902, p. 155, pl. 425, pl. 1, figs. 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa zaleucus</i>, Ollenback, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 894; Evans, 1923, p. 231, pl. i, figs. A 2.3 ({\female}); id., 1927, p. 26, pl. 1, fig. A 2.3 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Tros zaleucus</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43, pl. 1, fig. A 2.3 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa zaleucus</i> f. <i>punctata</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 231.</p>

<p><i>Tros zaleucus</i> f. <i>punctata</i>, Evans. 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing with a white distal band or patch; in the {\male} this is composed of two or three spots, and in the {\female} of four or five larger spots. <i>Underside</i> with the white area much more sharply defined.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;Where this race overlaps the area of <i>astorion</i> transitional forms are found (see <i>astorion</i>). Ollenbach, who collected <i>zaleucus</i> in Tavoy, describes the variation :&#x2014; ``The white areas on the hind wing vary considerably from four white interspaces to one, and in a single specimen there is no white at all, the wing being entirely black. This specimen is indistinguishable from <i>P. varuna astorion</i>. On the underside it has white interspaces, but so also has a specimen of <i>P. varuna</i> from Sikkim which is in my collection. I did not meet with <i>P. varuna</i> in Tavoy, so that it is probable that these two are only races of one species'' (<i>Ollenbach</i>, 1921 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p>Form <i>punetata</i> Evans.&#x2014;The white area of the hind wing bears black spots.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span> to <span class="smallcaps">South Burma</span>, and extending to West Siam. Does not occur within the areas of <i>astorion</i> and <i>varuna</i>, excepting where the usual overlapping occurs. Not common.</p>

<p>In Tavoy the butterfly is attracted by the flowers of a species of <i>Ageratum</i>.</p>

<p>5 <i>c</i>. <b>Polydorus varuna varuna</b> (White).</p>

<p><i>Papilio varuna,</i> White, 1842, p. 280 ({\male}); Distant, 1886, p. 334, pl. 31, figs. 3 ({\male}), 4 ({\female}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 260.</p>

<p><i>Papilio varuna varuna</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 30.</p>

<p><i>Byasa varuna</i> var. <i>varuna</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 231.</p>

<p><i>Tros varuna varuna</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing below with posterior white stripes before the distal margin, more prominent than in <i>astorion</i>; these stripes are sometimes indicated above.</p>

<p>{\female}. The posterior pale area on fore wing below more developed than in the {\male}, and also well developed on the upperside.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Archipelago</span>, extending to Penang and the Malay Peninsula. Rare in the Mergui Archipelago.</p>

<p>6. <b>Polydorus sycorax</b> (Grose-Smith).</p>

<p><i>Papilio sycorax,</i> Grose-Smith, 1885, p. 247 (Sumatra); Distant, 1886, p. 468, pl. 42, fig. 10; Rothschild, 1895, p. 256; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 29, t. 17 <i>a, b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pangerana sycorax</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1892, p. 54, pl. M, fig. 1 ({\male}); id., 1895, p. 512; Moore, 1902, p. 157.</p>

<p><i>Tros sycorax</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43 (Mergui).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing black, with indistinct vein-stripes. Hind wing black, with a bluish-grey distal band that in areas 3 to 6 bears rounded black post-discal spots and larger marginal ones. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing with grey-white distal area and rounded black post-discal spots in areas 2 to 6.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> paler than the {\male}, and hind wing with lighter bluish-grey distal area. <i>Underside</i> as in the {\male}.</p>

<p>Head and prothorax creamy-buff; abdomen dark at the base, buff-yellow below, bluish-grey above.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.&#x2013;In Sumatra the butterfly flies high and quickly, and is most often taken at flowering trees in the woods.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;The <span class="smallcaps">Mergui Archipelogo</span>, extending to the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra; occurring in hilly country. Very rare in the Mergui Archipelago.</p>

<p><i>Coon</i> Group.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Wings very long and narrow. Fore wing; costa slightly arched, apex broadly rounded, termen straight in the {\male}, slightly convex in the {\female}, and very oblique in both sexes; dorsum very short, less than half as long as the costa; cell long and narrow, considerably more than half length of wing; upper discocellular very little shorter than the middle; vein 10 from upper third, 11 from beyond middle of subcostal. Hind wing with long spatulate tail; costa straight, short; termen very long, broadly scalloped; veins 4 and 5 approximate at base. Antenn{\ae} slightly less than half the length of fore wing; club narrow, gradual. {\male} abdominal fold narrow, abrupt at apex; anal valves conspicuous, with a parting on the upperside.</p>

<p><b>7. Polydorus neptunus neptunus</b> (Gu\'erin).</p>

<p><i>Papilio neptunus</i> Gu\'erin, 1840, p. 43; Distant, 1885, p. 335, pl. 33, figs. 5 ({\male}), 6 ({\female}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 255.</p>

<p><i>Balignina neptunus</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 187.</p>

<p><i>Papilio neptunus neptunus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 33; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 894.</p>

<p><i>Byasa neptunus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros neptunus,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 43 (Tavoy to S. Burma).</p>

<p>This species was first recorded for the Indian fauna by Ollenbach, who took 2 {\male}{\male} and a {\female} in Tavoy.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The thorax below (pectus) red at the sides, and distal half of abdomen greyish-yellow. Fore wing black, with a broad light patch before the middle and a similar post-discal patch. Hind wing with a very thin tail, much widened at the end; two to four red or pale red post-discal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p>The butterfly flies slowly, and high in the air. Very rare in the Indian area, and commoner in Sumatra.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>. <span class="smallcaps">Tavoy</span> to <span class="smallcaps">South Burma</span>, extending to Malacca. The species also occurs in North Borneo, Sumatra, and Nias Island.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus coon</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. General coloration black. Head and sides of breast red or yellow, the abdomen beneath, laterally, and at the tip of the same colour. Fore wing narrow, smoky, the margins, veins, and folds smoky-black. Hind wing with tail spatulate, one or two cell-spots, a post-cellular row of spots, and a row of white submarginal spots; at the end of veins 2 and 3 is a red or yellow marginal spot.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;A woodland species found in the plains as well as in hilly country. It is often taken at the flowers of tall trees, and has a fluttering but rapid flight.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;A Malayan species extending from Java to <span class="smallcaps">Cachar</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Nicobars</span>. Seven subspecies are distinguished, of which three occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>8 <i>a</i>. <b>Polydorus coon cacharensis</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><p>Papilio cacharensis,</p> Butler, 1885, p. 334 (Cachar).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doubledayi cacharensis,</i> rothschild, 1895, pp. 253&#x2013;4; Bingham, 1907, pp. 23&#x2013;4.</p>

<p><o>Papilio coon doubledayi</o> ab. <i>cacharensis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 34.</p>

<p><i>Losariacacharensis</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 185, pl. 439, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa cacharensis</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros coon cacharensis,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 44.</p>

<p><i>Menelaides doubledayi,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville (<i>non</i> Wallace), 1887, p. 337.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with very conspicuous pale streaks, two in each area, that extend well into the cell, but do not reach the outer margin, where the dull black ground-colour forms a broadish transverse band. Hind wing black, in fresh specimens, in certain lights a beautiful blue gloss. Cell with a white patch which occupies less than half the apical part. Post-cellular white spots in areas 1 to 7 small, smaller than in the two other races, the spot in area 4 more or less obsolescent. The post-discal and marginal markings are pale, often yellowish-red. Head, sides of breast, and abdomen yellowish-red.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p>Wood-Mason (1887) records that it has a musk-scented body.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Cachar</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>8 <i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus coon doubledayi</b> (Wallace). (Fig. 12 <i>a</i>, imago; 12 <i>d</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doubledayi</i>, Wallace, 1865, p. 42; Moore, 1878 <i>a,</i> p. 840; Gosse, 1883, p. 323, pl. xxxii, figs. 17, 18 (genitalia); Distant, 1885, p. 336, pl. 33, fig. 4 ({\male}); Bingham, 1907, p. 23, fig. 4 <i>a</i>; Lathy, 1907, p. 3.</p>

<p><i>Menelaides doubledayi,</i> Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 435; Moore, 1889, p. 51.</p>

<p><i>Papilio doubledayi doubledayi,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 253; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 34, t. 16 <i>b</i>; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 894.</p>

<p><i>Lasaria doubledayi,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 185, pl. 439, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa coon doubledayi</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros coon doubledayi,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44, pl. 1, fig. A 2.6 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Only differs from <i>cacharensis</i> in the larger discal spots of the hind wing; the cell-spot occupies more than half the apical area of cell.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 118&#x2013;134 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;Harpe (fig. 12 <i>d</i>) a broad anteriorly narrowing plate which is entirely attached to the surface of the valve; its apex bilobed; dorsal and ventral edges upturned, the former at its middle with a sharp tooth directed basad (<i>Gosse,</i> 1883).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span> Very plentiful in Tavoy from October till May.</p>

<p>8 <i>c</i>. <b>Polydorus coon sambilanga</b> (Doherty).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doubledayi sambilanga,</i> Doherty, 1886 <i>b</i>, p. 263 (Great Nicobar).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doubledayi sambilanga,</i> rothschild, 1895, p. 254; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 39.</p>

<p><i>Losaria sambilanga,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 186.</p>

<p><i>Byasa coon sambilanga,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros coon sambilanga,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing with the spot below the cell short; the two red marginal spots are united with the corresponding spots in areas 2 and 3, as in <i>P. rhodifer.</i></p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Great Nicobar Island.</span> Usually very rare, but Doherty found it plentiful; it was not seen by Colonel Ferrar nor by Brigadier Evans when collecting in the island.</p>

<p>9. <b>Polydorus rhodifer</b> (Butler). (Fig. 12 <i>b</i>, imago; fig. 13 <i>a</i>&#x2013;<i>c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhodifer,</i> Butler, 1876 <i>a</i>, p. 57 (Andamans); Wood-Mason, 1880, p. 240; Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 253 ({\female}); Gosse, 1883, p. 323, pl. xxxii, figs. 19&#x2013;21 (genitalia); Staudinger &amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 6, fig. 3 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 254; Bingham, 1907, pp. 23, 24, fig. 4 <i>b</i>; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 34, fig. 16 <i>c.</i></p>

<p><i>Losaria rhodifer,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 186, pl. 440, pls. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa rhodifer,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros rhodifer,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Costal and distal margins of fore wing almost parallel; the wing, even in the {\female}, considerably narrower than in <i>P. coon.</i></p>

<p>{\male}. Ground-colour much darker than in <i>coon</i>; fore wing with the pale streaks extending only into the apex of the cell. Hind wing with much shorter post-cellular white markings, the spots at base of areas 4 and 5 and generally the spot in 7 absent; the submarginal and marginal vermilion spots are much larger; apical spatulate portion of tail vermilion. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen as in <i>coon,</i> but the head entirely vermilion-red.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\female}. Fore wing broader, red markings on hind wing more crimson than vermilion-red, often dull and irrorated slightly with black scales. Hind wing discal markings more extensive; the white mark in area 1 extends well below vein 1.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;140 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.&#x2014;Harpe (fig. 13 <i>a</i>) a broad plate, slightly narrowing anteriorly, attached entirely to the surface of the valve; apex trilobed, the dorsal lobe, much larger, and directed much more laterally, than in <i>doubledayi</i>, stands erect; the ventral lobe, a little below its tip, with an adventitious lamina, of conical outline, which also stands up; the dorsal edge is deeply incurved (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands.</span> Not rare.</p>

<p><i>Hector</i> Group.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing elongate, broader in {\female} than in {\male}; costa widely arched, apex produced, rounded; termen oblique, straight, or in the {\male} slightly concave in the middle, in the {\female} convex; dorsum straight, about half the length of costa; {\female} convex; dorsum straight, about half the length of costa; cell elongate, more than half the length of wing; discocellulars nearly erect, upper not much shorter than the middle; veins 10 and 11 from upper half of subcostal vein. Hind wing elongate, costa arched; termen scalloped, produced into a tail at vein 4; tail not so long as in the <i>Coon</i> Group, nor so distinctly and widely spatulate at the tip; dorsum long, straight; cell about three times as long as broad; veins 4 and 5 not approximate at the base; scent-fold of {\male} weakly developed or absent, without scent-wool, but sometimes with narrow scent-scales; anal claspers aborted, but the harpe is present. Antenn{\ae} about half the length of fore wing; club long, narrow, gradual.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus jophon</b> (Gray).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with white streaks in the cell and beyond the cell, not reaching the margin. Hind wing with apical part of cell white, and short white post-cellular streaks; a submarginal series of crimson lunules irrorated with black scales. Palpi, sides of breast, and tip of abdomen red.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}. Fore wing broader; the white and crimson markings larger and more conspicuous.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon to Peninsular India</span>; occurring in two subspecies. Usually rare.</p>

<p>10 <i>a</i>, <b>Polydorus jophon jophon</b> (Gray).</p>

<p><i>Papilio jophon,</i> Gray, 1852, p. 10, pl. 4, fig. 4 (Ceylon); Bingham, 1907, p. 22; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 34, t. 15 <i>a.</i></p>

<p><i>Menelarides jophon.</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 152, pl. 58, fig. 1 ({\female}); id., 1887, pl. 210, fig. 6 (larva); id., 1902, p. 176, pl. 436, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> (larva, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa jophon jophon,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros jophon jophon,</i> Evans. 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with three or four broad white streaks in the cell and a variable number of similar, somewhat broader streaks, that are bifid along their apical half, in the interspaces beyond. Hind wing post-cellular streaks broad, divided only by the black veins; a submarginal curved series of crimson lunules irrorated with black scales.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings more distinct and more sharply defined, the discal streaks and submarginal spots of hind wing each seven in number.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen above up to the preanal segment black; head in front and beneath, thorax at sides, and apical half of abdomen crimson, the last with one or two black lateral spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Most easily caught in the early morning, as after sunrise it flies high above the trees.</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;Yellow-brown.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``Dark purple-black, with crimson-coloured pointed tubercles, two on 2nd segment, eight on each of the 3rd and 6th, six on each of 8th to 10th, and four on 13th; 7th segment with a pale cream-coloured transverse band (interrupted on the dorsal line), including four tubercles of the same colour, below which on each side is a single crimson tubercle; on 2nd segment is a band composed of four pale tubercular spots, from the centre of which can be protruded a pair of short blunt yellow tentacles'' (<i>E. E. Green,</i> as quoted by Moore)..</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon.</span> Occurs locally in hilly country from 2,000 to 4,000 feet, and not rare where present.</p>

<p>10 <i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus jophon pandiyana</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Papilio pandiyanan,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 313; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 35, t. 15 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Menelaides pandiana,</i> Hampson, 1889, p. 363.</p>

<p><i>Menelaides pandiyana,</i> Fergusson, 1891, p. 446; Moore, 1902, p. 177. pl. 437, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio pandiyanus,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 234.</p>

<p><i>Papilio jophon pandiyana,</i> Bingham, 1907, pp. 19, 22.</p>

<p><i>Byasa jophon pandiyana,</i> Evans, 1923. p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros jophon pandiyana,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Compared with the nominotypical from the fore wing has more extended white, especially in the apical region, but is also more shaded with black scales; the internervular black streaks in areas 2 to 5 extend nearly to the cell. Hind wing with the posterior discal white spot usually reaching vein 1; the anterior spot is very large in the {\male}, small or divided into two spots, or obliterated in the {\female}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p>The following account of the early stages and habits is from an unpublished manuscript communicated by Mr. T.R. Bell :&#x2014;</p>

<p>``<i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Shape of <i>P. aristolochi{\ae}.</i> Black, with red-tipped, fleshy, elongate tubercles : segment 2 with white anterior margin tinged red dorsally between the lateral tubercles; a white transverse band on 7, the tubercles of this segment also white; tubercles of 11 white, with a white line in front of each dorsal one. Segment 2 black with a chocolate-brown shining shield-collar, having a fine, white, dorsal line through it, and a lateral and subspiracular, fleshy, short, conical tubercle, the front margin creamy-white tinged with vermilion. Segments 3 and 4 with dorso-lateral, lateral, supra- and subspriracular, fleshy, short conical processes; 5 to 12 with a subdorsal and subspiracular similar tubercle process; 7 to 10 with an additional and much smaller tubercle beneath the last; 13 and 14 with only the dorso-lateral tubercles, situated at hind margin.</p>

<p>``<i>Coloration.</i>&#x2014;Velvety brown-black, the tips of the tubercles tinged obscurely with red, except those on segments 7 and 11, which are creamy-white. A white transverse band on 7; a distinct white line runs diagonally forwards and down to anterior margin of 11 from the dorso-lateral tubercle; a similar obscure white line on each of segments 2, 10, 12, and 13; a dull, black, semicircular space at extremity of anal flap; venter black. Length 42 mm.</p>

<p>``<i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Shape, colour, and mode of suspension almost the same as in <i>aristolochi{\ae}</i>. Ventral line strongly convex from head to end of wings. Cremaster short, stout, wedge-shaped, with ventral extensor ridges enclosing on oval space bearing the anal clasper-scar. Surface of pupa minutely pitted, each pit with a minute, black hair. Dorsal line of thorax slightly carinate from front margin to just before apex where it bifurcates abruptly to the apex, then runs back in parallel lines to hind margin of thorax; on lateral edge of body on each shoulder there is a thin foliaceous expansion that is slightly up-curved; lateral wing expansion with an up-curved edge continued to segment 8 and up to front margin of 9; segments 7 to 10 with a laterally flattened, distally rounded, squarish, dorso-lateral expansion prominence, that on 8 the largest, that on 10 the smallest; a minute subspiracular tubercle on segments 8 to 11. Spiracles of 2 covered by a large, kidney-shaped, dark brown expansion.</p>

<p>``<i>Coloration.</i>&#x2014;Very pale pinkish-brown bone-colour, suffused darker on the wings, sides, head and segment 2, the suffusion still darker in the spiracular region of segments 4 to 7, where the spiracles are surrounded by enamel-white broadly and irregularly; 5 to 8 faintly marbled with white dorsally; 2 with a lateral white horse-shoe mark. Length 23 mm.</p>

<p>``<i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The eggs are laid on the undersides of young leaves in evergreen jungles or in nalla-beds in a near evergreen jungles in wet, thick forest. The larv{\ae} were found in May. The mature larva in sluggish, and rests on the undersides of leaves. The food-plant is <i>Bragantia wallichii</i> R. Br., family Aristolochiace{\ae}, a small tree found locally from Nepal southwards to Ceylon. It is also the food-plant of <i>T minos, P. hector,</i> and <i>P. aristolochi{\ae}</i>. The pupa is formed on a dead or dry stick to which it is fastened by black silk.''</p>

<p>The butterfly frequents the evergreen jungle and appears in the early morning at flowers, before which it hovers with a fanning motion of the wings. It can be caught inside the forest, flying low. It is most common from April to May, and from September to October, but is a local insect.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India.</span> Common in the hilly country of Travancore and in the Nilgiris from 1,000 to 3,000 feet; also on the slopes of the Western Ghats, and at the foot of the Ghats (<i>vide</i> Yates, 1931). Bell reports it as local in North Kanara, but fairly plentiful in Mahime in the Tali Palm forests; on the Garsappa Ghat; at Jog, in evergreen jungles adjacent to the Falls; at Nilkund on the crest of the Ghats in Sirsi Taluka; at Yan in Kunta and Ulvi in Supa Talaka. ``Once I saw a specimen on the Hyder Ghat near Karwar.''</p>

<p>11. <b>Polydorus hector</b> (Linn{\ae}us). (Fig. 14 <i>a&#2013;e</i>, genitalia; Pl. III, fig. 3, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio hector,</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 459; Clerck, 1764, t. 53, fig. 1 (fig. typica); Westwood, 1845, p. 9, pl. 3, figs. 1&#x2013;4 (larva, pupa); Horsfiled &amp; Moore, 1857, p. 93, pl. 2, figs. 4, 4 <i>a</i>, 4 <i>b</i> (larva, pupa) Gosse, 1883, p. 329, pl. xxxiii, figs. 27&#x2013;31 ({\male} genit.); Watson, 1890 <i>a</i>, p. 268; id., 1890 <i>b</i>, p. 37; Betham, 1891, p. 330; Rothschild, 1895, p. 233; Bingham, 1907, pp. 18, 19, 20, pl. 11, fig. 83 ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 34; Bell, 1911, pp. 1130&#x2013;2, pl. D 1, figs. 23 ({\male}), 23 <i>a</i> ({\female}); Williams, 1927, p. 20 (migration).</p>

<p><i>Aernauta hector,</i> Berge, 1842, p. 108, t. 37, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Menelaides hector,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 152, pl. 58, fig. 2; Swinhoe, 1885, p. 145; de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b</i>, p. 52; Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Forgusson, 1891, p. 446.</p>

<p><i>Byasa hector,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros hector,</i> Evans, 1932, <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p><i>Papilio heroicus,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>e</i>, p. 49 ({\male}, Ceylon).</p>

<p>{\male} <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with a broad white interrupted band from the subcostal vein opposite the origin of veins 10 and 11, extended obliquely to the tornus, and a second similar subapical band; both bands composed of detached irregularly idented broad streaks in the interspaces. Hind wing with a discal posteriorly strongly curved series of seven crimson spots followed by a submarginal series of crimson lunules. Cilia black alternating with white.</p>

<p>Head, collar, sides of the breast, and the abdomen, with the exception of the dorsal plates of the anterior segments, red.</p>

<p>{\male}. Resembles the {\female}. Discal and submarginal markings duller, pale crimson irrorated with black scales; in some specimens the anterior spots and lunules almost white. Abdomen above with the black colour extending further towards the apex.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 90&#x2013;110 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;Valve (fig. 14 <i>d</i>) much aborted, a slender straight rod with the point bent dorsad nearly at a right angle, and bearing a short spine; dorsal margin beset with short straight bristles, giving the whole organ the appearance of a comb; base broadly dilated, and both valves incline towards each other so that the summits are almost in contact. Scaphium represented apparently by the scaphial teeth (fig. 14 <i>c</i>). These are two pear-shaped organs each of which sends off a broad process of subtrigonal outline, horizontally, towards the middle of the cavity; the process is a sort of flat cushion, apparently of short close pile, throughout which are set minute slender needle-like spines vertically; the end is a thickened knob, whence descends obliquely a group of very long straight bristles.</p>

<p>Gosse (1883, p. 332) remarks that there is a very close resemblance between all the organs (except the uncus) in <i>P. hector</i> and the corresponding organs in the Saturniid moth <i>Anther{\ae}a roylei</i> (<i>Gosse,</i> 1883).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Head round, black and shiny, somewhat hidden under segment 2. Segment 2 with four bright red, short, fleshy tubercles on front margin of dorsum, and two similar ones on the back margin. Segments 3 to 13 each with a subdorsal, longish, conical, fleshy tubercle, and a marginal row of similar tubercles. In addition segments 2 to 5 with a lateral row of similar tubercles, the one on segment 5 reduced to a spot. On the front margin of segments 8 to 12 are two subdorsal, flesh-coloured spots, and on the 7th segment are two larger similar spots on the posterior margin. Lateral flesh-coloured spots on segments 6 to 14. All the tubercles bright red. Spiracles oval, shiny black. The two long tubercles on segment 2 are black-tipped. Colour of body rich black-brown. Osmeterium orange. Length 45 mm.; breadth 10 mm. On <i>Aristochia indica</i> Linn. (from <i>Bell,</i> 1911).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Head flat in front, produced in two sharp-edged, semicircular, rounded, ear-like, lateral projections connected by a ridge. Thorax carinate on dorsal line. Segments 8 and 11 each have two large ear-like projections. Cremaster short, strong, square at the end. Colour light brown, marked on the dorsum with white, looking like brown, marked on the dorsum with white, looking like brown alabaster; a whitened dorsal line on segment 2, another raised line on each side of this, and another round the spiracle of the same segment. Length 30 mm.; breadth 10 mm. (from <i>Bell.</i> 1911).</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;One of the commonest butterflies of the plains, but is found singly even at elevations of over 5,000 feet. It is often found on low flowering bushes and plants.</p>

<p>In the `Entomologist's Monthly Magazine,' 1880, p. 276. Mr. R. S. Eaton notes that in Bombay this butterfly roosted in great numbers together. ``On the Western Ghats between Vingoria and Belgaum, where this butterfly occurred in some numbers, I also noted the habit they have of roosting in company on twigs of some thorny shrub, but I never saw more than a score or so together.''</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon, Peninsular India</span>, and the <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands.</span> Occurs in the Nilgiris from 1,000 to 7,000 feet. Very rare in the Andamans.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae}</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black, the fore wing discal area paler, with black fold-stripes and well-marked pale vein-stripes. Hind wing with a spatulate tail, white discal spots, and red sub-marginal spots which above are more or less strongly shaded with black. The {\female} is paler, with broader wings. Abdomen red laterally and at the tip, also the margin of the ventral segments; the sides of the breast and also the head red.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Black, with red fleshy tubercles; the tubercles are short, and there are no fleshy-coloured spots; no lateral tubercle on segment 5; segment 11 with a white spot at the anterior base of the subdorsal tubercle, and an indication of one in the same position on segment 12; segment 8 with a small white spot at the posterior, and a larger one at the anterior base of subdorsal tubercle; posterior half of segment 7 pure white; osmeterium orange. Length 30 mm.; breadth 8 mm.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Abdomen with four pairs of rounded lobes, and the lateral lobes of the thorax also rounded.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Visits flowers and is sometimes taken in crowds of flowering trees, especially in the early morning.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;West, Central, and Eastern China to the Loo Choo Islands, extending southwards to the Lesser Sunda Islands, Philippines, Borneo, Natuna Islands, Sumatra, and Java.</p>

<p>The species ranges over the whole of the Indian area, where it splits up into six subspecies.</p>

<p>A common species which seldom ascends above 4,000 feet.</p>

<p>12 <i>a</i>, <b>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae} aristolochi{\ae}</b> (Fabircius). (Fig. 15, imago; fig. 16 <i>a&#x2014;c</i>, genitalia; Pl. I. fig. 3, larva, fig. 4, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae},</i> Fabricius, 1775, p. 443; de Nic\'eville, 1881, p. 53; Elwes, 1881, p. 872; id., 1888, p. 427; Davidson &amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 362; Watson, 1890 <i>a,</i> p. 268; id., 1891, p. 53; Rothschild, 1895, pp. 245&#x2013;9; Bingham, 1907, p. 20, figs. 3 <i>a</i>, 3 <i>c</i> (abdom.); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361; Cockayne, 1914, p. 171; Bell, 1911, pp. 1132-3, pl. D 1, fig. 24; Ghosh, 1914 p. 34 (figs.).</p>

<p><i>Menelaides aristolochi{\ae},</i> de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b</i>, p. 52; id., 1886, p. 377; Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 130 Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Fergusson, 1891. p. 446; Moore, 1903, p. 178, pl. 441, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>d</i>, pl. 442, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae} aristolochi{\ae},</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 38, t. 16 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Byasa aristolochi{\ae} aristolochi{\ae},</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros aristolochi{\ae} aristolochi{\ae},</i> Evans, 1932, <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p><i>Papilio diphilus,</i> Esper, 1792, p. 156, t. 40, fig. 2; Gosse, 1883, p. 329, pl. xxxiii, figs. 17&#x2013;20 (genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Aernauta diphilus,</i> Berge, 1842, p. 108, t. 36, fig. 1 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Menalaides diphilus,</i> Swinhoe, 1884 <i>b,</i> p. 512; id., 1885 <i>a,</i> p. 145; id., 1886, p. 433.</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae}</i> var. <i>diphilus,</i> Distant 1885, p. 337, pl. 31, figs. 6, 7.</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae}</i> f. <i>diphilus,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 38.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing black from the base to beyond the point of origin of vein 2, the stripes placed between vein 2 and the inner margin rarely shortened. Hind wing with white discal spots but no cell-spot; underside with the discal spot in area 1 usually red.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 80&#x2013;110 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;Harpe (fig. 16 <i>a</i>) takes the place of the claspers, which are much reduced. Shape somewhat like a bell-jar with thickened margins and bulbous apex which is beset with minute curved spines and is inclined dorsad (<i>Gosse,</i> 1883).</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;</p>

<p>1. Discal spots of hind wing proximally reduced and therefore remote from the cell. Form <b>aristolochi{\ae}</b> (Fabr.)</p>

<p>2. Discal spots of hind wing placed close to the cell. Form <b>diphilus</b> (Esp.)</p>

<p>Both forms fly together, but <i>aristolochi{\ae}</i> appears to be the commoner one during the hot rainy season.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Wood-Mason (1886) says : ``The male emits a strong and slightly pungent odour resembling that of ? Batchelor's Buttons or of the rose with a trace of acetic acid.''</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;The whole of <span class="smallcaps">India</span>, except Burma.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>12 <i>b.</i> <b>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae} ceylonicus</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Menelaides ceylonica,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 151, pl. 57, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i>, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}, larva, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae} ceylonicus,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 249 (ab.); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 38; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae}</i> var. <i>ceylonica</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 21.</p>

<p><i>Papilio diphilus,</i> Gray, 1852, p. 10 (var. c).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing very light beneath, the black stripe below vein 2 nearly always shortened. Hind wing discal spots prominent and placed close to the cell, the middle ones rounded off distally; cell usually with a white spot. {\female} with abdomen almost entirely black above, excepting the last segment.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>; very common.</p>

<p>12 <i>c</i>. <b>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae} goniopeltis</b> (Rothschild).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae} goniopeltis,</i> Rothschild, 1908, p. 167; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 38.</p>

<p><i>Byasa aristolochi{\ae} goniopeltis,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros aristolochi{\ae} goniopeltis,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 44.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with the black basal area extending only to the point of origin of vein 2; between this area and the black distal margin the wing is very pale beneath. Hind wing discal spots often edged with red, placed close to the cell, and rarely reduced, the one in area 2 usually pointed and mostly very long; many specimens have a small cell-spot. Underside of hind wing with the spot in area 1 usually entirely red, also the veins separating the spots are frequently reddish, as well as the spots themselves.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>; also found in South China and Siam.</p>

<p>12 <i>d</i>. <b>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae} sawi</b> (Evans).</p>

<p><i>Tros aristolochi{\ae} sawi,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44 (Car Nicobar).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Resembles <i>goniopeltis</i> Roths, but the post-cellular spots in areas 2 to 5 of the hind wing above are only half as large.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Car Nicobar</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>12 <i>e</i>. <b>Polydorus aristolochi{\ae} camorta</b> (Moore).  (Fig. 17, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio camorta,</i> Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 592 ({\female}); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 237; id., 1882, p. 18.</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristolochi{\ae} camorta,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 250 (Nicobars); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 38, t. 16 <i>a</i>; Bingham, 1907, pp. 20, 21, figs. 3 <i>b</i> (al. post.).</p>

<p><i>Byasa aristolochi{\ae} camorta,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros aristolochi{\ae} camorta,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 44.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing with only two distinct post-cellular spots, in areas 1 <i>b</i> and 2; the spots in areas 3 and 4 sometimes show obscurely. Underside with two smaller spots at the apex of the cell and a third in the cell.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;Central group of the <span class="smallcaps">Nicobar Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>12 <i>f</i>. <b>Polydorus aristoloechi{\ae} kondulana</b> (Evans).</p>

<p><i>Tros aristolochi{\ae} kondulana,</i> Evans. 1932, p. 45 (South Nicobars).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing above with post-cellular spots in areas 2 to 4 or 5 very small, except for the spot in area 4.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Nicobar Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p><i>Latreillei</i> Group.</p>

<p>Fore wing elongate, costal margin arched, more than twice as long as dorsal margin; apex broadly rounded; termen very oblique, dorsum straight; cell elongate, broad, more than half the length of the wing; upper discocellular only a little shorter than the middle one; veins 10 and 11 from apical half of subcostal and along the greater part of their length very close to vein 12, vein 9 from upper apex of cell. Hind wing very long and narrow; termen broadly scalloped, produced at vein 4 into a broad spatulate tail; cell very narrow; basal portion of subcostal between veins 7 and 8 equal to middle discocellular vein lying between veins 4 and 5; {\male} scent-fold and scent-wool strongly developed. Anal elaspers of {\male} normal, without distinct tooth at the tip. Antenn{\ae} not half the length of fore wing.</p>

<p>The species of this group occur only on the continent and on the islands off China and Japan.</p>

<p>13. <b>Polydorus adamsoni</b> (Grose-Smith). (Fig. 18, genitalia).</p>

<p>13. <b>Polydorus adamsoni</b> (Grose-Smith). (Fig. 18, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio adamsoni,</i> Grose-Smith, 1886, p. 149 (Salween River); Smith &amp; Kirby, 1889, <i>Papilio,</i> p. 11, pl. 5, figs. 3, 4; Rothschild, 1895, p. 262; de Nic\'eville, 1899 <i>b</i>, p. 334; Bingham, 1907, p. 30; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 31, t. 19 <i>c</i>; id., 1928, p. 167, pl. vi, fig. 15 (genit.) (Shan States and Tenasserim).</p>

<p><i>Byasa adamsoni,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 167, pl. 431, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}); Evans, 1923, p. 232.</p>

<p><i>Tros adamsoni,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p><i>Byasa mineroides</i>, Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 435, pl. 20, figs. 2, 2 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 3 ({\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}. Smaller than <i>P. latreillei,</i> the ground-colour darker, distinctly darker on the basal half of the fore wing. Hind wing with uniform ground-colour; an additional white elongate spot, sometimes transversely divided into two, in area 5; a submarginal series of only three lunules in areas 2, 3, and 4, that in 4 white; no terminal crimson spot at vein 3 or on the tail.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to above, but the ground-colour paler and more opaque, the white markings more or less tinged with crimson, and a well-defined submarginal white spot always present in area 6.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen much as in <i>P. latreillei.</i></p>

<p>{\male}. Resembles the {\male}, but the ground-colour paler, the white markings on hind wing larger, the submarginal lunules more or less white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 90&#x2013;110 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 18).&#x2014;``Armature of clasper a non-dentate ridge which ends basally and distally in a pointed process, the distal one being the longer'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States to the Dawna Hills</span>; rare.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus latreillei</b> (Donovan).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Pale brownish-black. Hind wing with a broad white discal band; submarginal spots 4, rarely 5, the posterior three red, the others more or less white; tail with a red spot at the tip; {\male} scent-wool white.</p>

<p>Head, prothorax, sides of breast, and abdomen red. Abdomen below red with black spots.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-West India to Assam</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; usually rare. Two subspecies are distinguished.</p>

<p>14 <i>a</i>. <b>Polydorus latreillei latreillei</b> (Donovan). (Figs. 19 <i>a</i>, imago; 19 <i>b</i>, venation; 19 <i>c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio latreillei,</i> Donovan, 1806, pl. 140 (Nepal); Gosse, 1883, p. 321, pl. xxxii, fig. 11 (genitalia); Elwes, 1888, p. 425; Rothschild, 1895, p. 261; de Nic\'eville, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 566; Bingham, 1907, p. 29, figs. 5 <i>a</i>, 5 <i>b</i> (neuration); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Byasa latreillei</i>, Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 592; Moore. 1902, p. 165, pl. 430, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>c</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio latreillei latreillei</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 31; id., 1928, p. 161 (N.W. India to Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Byasa latreillei latreillei,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Tros latreillei latreillei,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p><i>Papilio minereus,</i> Gray, 1831, p. 32; id., 1846, p. 5, pl. 1.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> dull brownish-black. Fore wing with streaks in the cell, the internervular streaks and the veins velvety black. Hind wing with more uniform ground-colour to apex of cell, and beyond this in areas 2, 3, and 4 with broad elongate white spots, the spot in area 2 slightly tinged outwardly with crimson; sometimes a white crimson-tinted spot also in area 1; the patch in area 3 larger than the others. A submarginal series of crimson lunules in areas 2 to 5, that in area 5 generally more or less white; a crimson spot at the end of vein 3, and one on the tip of the tail.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with much paler ground-colour. Hind wing markings larger, the crimson spots brighter; sometimes a small discal and adnervular spot in area 5, and a submarginal small white lunule in area 6 also present; the crimson-tinted discal spot in area 1 always present.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}; slightly paler, with larger white and crimson markings on both sides of the hind wing; usually a discal adnervular spot in area 5.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 19 <i>c</i>).&#x2014;``Armature of clasper a broadly rounded ridge which is strongly dentate distally and bears one or more teeth along the ventral side; the number and size of the teeth variable; apical process of penis slightly curved towards the left side'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>, more common in Mussoorie than elsewhere. Only found at high elevations between 7,000 and 9,000 feet.</p>

<p>14 <i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus latreillei kabrua</b> (Tytler).</p>

<p><i>Papilio kabrua,</i> Tytler, 1915 <i>a</i>, p. 513 ({\male}{\female}) (Naga Hills).</p>

<p><i>Byasa latreillei kabrua</i>, Evans, 1923. p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Papilio latreillei kabrua,</i> Jordan, 1928, p. 161 (Naga Hills and Manipur); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45, pl. 1, fig. A 2.12 ({\female}) (Assam to N. Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. This race differs from the nominotypical form by the hind wing having an additional large white spot in area 5, reaching vein 6, and the spot in area 4 completely filling the base of that area. There is no submarginal white spot in area 6 on the upperside, and it is often absent below.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Assam, Manipur,</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Naga Hills</span> from 5,000 to 8,400 feet, in May and June; rare.</p>

<p>15. <b>Polydorus polla</b> (de Nic\'eville). (Fig. 20, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Byasa polla,</i> de Nic\'eville, 1897 <i>b</i>, p. 633, {\male} (N. Shan States; N. Chin Hills); Watson, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 671 (N. Chin Hills); de Nic\'eville, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 565, pl. 4, fig. 28 (N. Shan States, east of Bhamo); Moore, 1902, p. 166, pl. 429, fig. 2 ({\male}); Evans, 1924, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polla,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 30; Tytler, 1915 <i>a</i>, p. 513 (Naga Hills and Manipur); Jordan, 1928, p. 160, pl. vi, fig. 1 (genit.).</p>

<p><i>Papilio latreillei polla,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 31.</p>

<p><i>Tros polla,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p>{\male}. Very closely resembles <i>P. latreillei</i> {\male}, but the fore wing is proportionately rather narrower, the termen more oblique, the tornus more rounded. Hind wing with a discal white patch composed of four elongate spots in areas 2 to 4, that in area 4 very broad, filling the area between the middle of veins 5 and 6; a submarginal series of lunules, larger than in <i>latreillei</i>, and all vermilion-red, not crimson, both on the upper and undersides; cilia between the tornus and apex of vein 3, apex of tail and cilia at apex of vein 5 vermilion-red.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with the discal spot in area 1 vermilion-red, and the submarginal red lunule in area 2 is produced to the vermilion-red marginal edging below it. Antenn{\ae}, head thorax, and abdomen as in <i>P. latreillei.</i></p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with the white discal patch continued posteriorly to the inner margin or nearly so, not extending to the end of the cell.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 20).&#x2014;``Armature of clasper nearly as in <i>P. latreillei,</i> but the ventral margin of the harpe distally enlarged into a fairly prominent dentate lobe; penis and anal segment as in <i>P. latreillei</i>'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1928).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> to <span class="smallcaps">North Burma</span>; very rare. Recorded from the Northern Shan States; N. Chin Hills; Bernardmyo, 6,000 feet; Manipur and the Naga Hills at 8,000 feet in June.</p>

<p>16. <b>Polydorus nevilli</b> (Wood-Mason). (Fig. 21, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio nevilli,</i> Wood-Mason, 1882, p. 105; Elwes, 1888, p. 424; Rothschild, 1895, pp. 263&#x2013;4; Bingham, 1907, p. 33; Seitz, 1907, p. 8, t. 1 <i>c</i>; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 31; id., 1928, p. 168, pl. vii, figs. 1 ({\male}), 2 ({\female}), pl. vi. fig. 16 (genit.) (N.E. Assam, Yunnan, W. China).</p>

<p><i>Byasa nevilli,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 374, pl. 15, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}); Moore, 1902, p. 164, pl. 429, fig. 1 ({\male}); Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Tros nevilli,</i> Evans. 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p><i>Papilio chentsong,</i> Oberth\dd{u}r, 1886, p. 13, pl. 1, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Resembles <i>P. ravana</i> Moore, but is smaller, with the markings also proportionately smaller. Hind wing with three submarginal lunules, never white or partly white as in <i>ravana</i>, the lunule in area 3 very often wanting; two large white, sometimes slightly reddish, spots in areas 5 and 6, the former reaching almost or quite to the cell; no spot on the tail; scent-wool yellowish-white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 21).&#x2014;``The harpe of the {\male} is very characteristic, bearing proximally a knob-like process; the teeth are restricted to the obtuse apex or to the apical third'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Southern Shan States</span>, and extending to West China where it is very common; very rare in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus philoxenus</b> (Gray). (Fig. 22 <i>a</i>, {\male}; 22 <i>b</i>&#x2013;<i>e</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing with three submarginal red spots in areas 2, 3, and 4, sometimes a very small red admarginal spot at the end of vein 3; in area 5 usually a large white spot formed by the union of a discal and a submarginal spot; benind this patch very often a second smaller one, very rarely a spot before vein 5; tail with a double red spot. Scent-wool grey-black. In the {\female} the red anal spot, especially below, is often prolonged in band-shape to the apex of the cell.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} black; palpi, thorax, and abdomen crimson beneath, the abdomen with a line of black spots along each side; head and thorax above anteriorly crimson, rest of thorax and abdomen black.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 22 <i>b&#x2013;e</i>).&#x2014;``The dorsal process inclines distad and varies somewhat in length; occasionally there is a small tubercle at each side of it. Where the anal sternite (scaphium) touches the tergite the latter bears a small longitudinal ridge on each side. The anal sternite is proximally strongly convex on the dorsal side. The setiferous ventral area on the inner side of the clasper is distally much broader than in the proximal half, the ventral margin of the harpe slanting upwards; the harpe is roughly triangular, with the basal ventral angle produced into a large conical process, the distal angle is pointed or more or less obtuse, usually bearing one or more small teeth, the proximal process and the ventral margin dentate, the theeth small and sharp and very variable in number. Penis-sheath pale to the apex, not sharply pointed'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1928).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``2&#x00BD; inches long; pale purple-brown; head and legs shining black; head small, corneous, sparsely covered with black hairs; 2nd segment with two short tubercles on each side and a nuchal, transverse, flattened, corneous, tentacular sheath in front; 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th segments each with eight short tubercles, four on each side, the sub-dorsal series longest; 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th segments each with six tubercles, the 11th, 12th, and 13th segments each with four shorter tubercles; each tubercle is red at the apex and purple-black streaked at the base; intervening space between the tubercles with a transverse and dorsal series of paler purple-black spots; these latter markings all with pale borders; 7th and 8th segments each with a lateral, short, broad, oblique white band'' (<i>Moore</i>). Occurs on <i>Nepenthes</i>.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Reddish-ochreous, broad laterally; head broad and slightly cleft in front; thorax convex above and beneath, angular at the sides; wing-cases dilated laterally; abdominal segments with lateral foliaceous appendages'' (<i>Moore</i>). Makes a squeaking sound when touched.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North India, Burma,</span> Siam, Annam, and Tong-king to China and Formosa. Two subspecies belong to the Indian fauna.</p>

<p>17 <i>a</i>. <b>Polydorus philoxenus philoxenus</b> (Gray).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus,</i> Gray, 1831, p. 32 (Nepal); id., 1833, pl. 2; de Nic\'eville, 1881, p. 53; Staudinger &amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 9, t. 5 ({\male}); Elwes, 1888, p. 426; de Nic\'eville, 1890, p. 387; Rothschild, 1895, pp. 264&#x2013;5; Bingham, 1907, p. 31 (part.); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Byasa philoxenus,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 259, pl. 12, fig. 5 (larva), 5 <i>a</i> (pupa); Doherty, 1886 <i>a,</i> p. 136; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 321; Moore, 1902, p. 159, pl. 426, figs. 1 (<i>l., p.</i>), 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male)}.</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus philoxenus,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 32, t. 19 <i>a</i> ({\male}); id., 1928, p. 162, t. vi, fig. 6 (genit.) (S. Kashmir to Nepal).</p>

<p><i>Byasa philoxenus philoxenus,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233, pl. 1, fig. A 2.15 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Tros philoxenus philoxenus,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45 pl. 1, fig. A 2.15 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus lama,</i> Rothschild (<i>non</i> Oberth.), 1895, p. 266 (``Kashmir''); Bingham, 1907, pp. 30&#x2013;1; Jordan, 1928, p. 162 (``N. Kashmir'').</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus letincius,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1908, p. 72 (N. W. India)</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> velvety black. Fore wing with broad pale adnervular streaks that do not extend to the outer margin and only slightly into the cell. Hind wing with a very large white quadrate spot in area 5, and usually a white spot in areas 4 or 6 or in both; a series of post-discal crimson or red lunules in areas 2, 3, and 4, followed by similarly coloured admarginal spots in areas 2 and 3 and at the tip of the tail, the lunule in area 2 nearly always, and that in area 3 very often, joined to the admarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with more opaque and duller ground-colour. Fore wing with very broad adnervular streaks. Hind wing as above, but with an additional elongate crimson spot near base of area 3, and a broad irregular transverse crimson bar below it in areas 1 and 2; the other markings somewhat larger than on the upperside, the white margins often tinged with red along their edges.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but with duller ground-colour; markings above much duller crimson, often nearly white and much irrorated with black scales; the white quadrate spot in area 5 generally larger than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;a very variable form merging into <i>polyeutes</i> Doubleday. Dark specimens, occurring in Kashmir, closely resemble the Chinese race <i>lama</i> Oberth\dd{u}r.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Nepal</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>17 <i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus philoxenus punchi</b> (O. Bang-Haas).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus punchi,</i> O. Bang-Haas, 1933 <i>a</i>, p. 261 ({\male}{\female} West Kashmir : Punch State).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Much smaller than the nominotypical form. Hind wing in {\male} with a larger whiter spot in front of vein 5. {\female}, in addition, with a second smaller white spot and with the red anal spot on both sides of hind wing weakly defined.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Western Kashmir.</span> The specimens were taken on the Jhelum River, 11,000 feet, in May.</p>

<p>I have not seen specimens of this form.</p>

<p>17 <i>c</i>. <b>Polydorus philoxenus polyeuctes</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyeuctes,</i> Doubleday, 1842, p. 74; id., 1846, p. 9, pl. 2, fig. 3 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, pp. 265&#x2013;6 (<i>P. philoxenus,</i> ab. {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus polyeuctes,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 32; Evans, 1923, p. 233; Jordan, 1928, pp. 162&#x2013;3, pl. vi, figs. 4, 5, 7 (genit., {\male}{\female}) (Sikkim to Yunnan, Tong-king, S. Annam, and Tenasserim).</p>

<p><i>Tros philoxenus polyeuctes,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus,</i> Moore (<i>non</i> Gray), 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 840; de Nic\'eville, 1881, p. 53; Elwes, 1888, p. 426; Watson, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 671; Moore, 1902, p. 159 (part.); Tytler, 1912, p. 589; South, 1913, p. 364.</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus</i> var. <i>polymitis,</i> Tytler, 1912, p. 589.</p>

<p><i>Papilio nepenthes,</i> Ehrmann, 1920, p. 22; Holland, 1924, p. 323 (= <i>P. philoxenus</i>).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The {\male} without any trace of a white spot above or below the large quadrate white patch in area 5. Front of head and abdomen below less black than in the nominotypical form, and hind wing darker below. The spots on the upperside are occasionally darkened.</p>

<p>According to de Nic\'eville this butterfly, especially the female, has a very strong disagreeable musky odour, which persists long after the insect is dead and dry.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span> Very common in some areas, and occurs in wooded districts at elevations of 1,000&#x2013;5,000 feet all through the summer. Also occurs in Yunnan, Siam, Annam, and Tong-king.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus dasarada</b> (Moore). (Figs. 23 <i>a&#x2013;c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Larger than <i>P. philoxenus,</i> with broader tails to the hind wing. Body beneath more wooly than in <i>P. philoxenus,</i> at the sides of the abdomen usually pale instead of vivid red. Genitalia with the anal hook of the {\male} simple; the harpe more strongly dentate than in <i>P. philoxenus,</i> and distinctly different in the four subspecies. Hind wing narrow, the cell narrower than in <i>P. philoxenus</i>; a large white spot in area 5 as in <i>P. philoxenus,</i> many specimens with a small spot before this patch, rarely also a spot behind it; the submarginal spot placed before the tail white or whitish, in the {\female} often a complete discal band.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 23).&#x2014;``The anal tergite of the {\male} lacks the dorsal process always found in <i>P. philoxenus</i>; the penis-sheath ends with a gradually narrowed, sharply pointed, well-chitinized, straight process; harpe of clasper longer than in <i>P. philoxenus,</i> its teeth are larger and more numerous'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p><i>Early stages.</i>&#x2014;Described under <i>ravana.</i></p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;A forest species which is usually taken in open speces in the woods and at flowering trees, round which the butterfly sails with a slow, graceful flight. It has a very strong offensive smell.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-West India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>, Tong-king, and Hainan. Three subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>18 <i>a</i>. <b>Polydorus dasarada ravana</b> (Moore). (Fig. 23 <i>a</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio ravana,</i> Moore, 1857 <i>a,</i> p. 96; Elwes, 1888, p. 423; Rothschild, 1895, p. 262; Bingham, 1907, p. 33; Seitz, 1907, p. 8, t. 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}); Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361; id., 1911 <i>b</i>, p. 875 (early stages).</p>

<p><i>Byasa ravana,</i> Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 592 (Tehri Garhwal); Moore, 1902, p. 163, pl. 428, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i>, c ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio dasarada ravana,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 32; id., 1928, p. 164, pl. vi, fig. 8 (genit.) (Kashmir to W. Nepal).</p>

<p><i>Byasa dasarada ravana,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Tros dasarada ravana,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> brownish-black. Fore wing with velvety black internervular streaks that extend into the cell in many specimens; veins black. Hind wing with a submarginal series of white markings more or less tinged with crimson, the markings in areas 2, 3, and 4 lunular, in 5 and 6 elongate rectangular, in 7 a minute spot, the white rectangular marking in area 5 conspicuously larger than the others; a crimson spot on the tail on each side of vein 4.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to above, with very much paler ground-colour; hind wing with an additional pale crimson spot near the base of areas 1 and 2.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, thorax, and abdomen black; head crimson; underside of palpi, sides of thorax and abdomen crimson, the palpi with a mixture of black hairs, the abdomen at the base and on the sides spotted with black.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}. Ground-colour brown, very much paler than in the  {\male}; internervular, velvety black streaks on fore wing very narrow. Hind wing distal area with black ground-colour, the markings larger than in the {\male} and purer white on the upperside; in addition, a series of white discal spots near base of areas 1, 2, 3, and 4, that in area 1 tinged with crimson.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings similar to above, but both the discal and the posterior submarginal spots are more strongly tinged with crimson.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 23 <i>a</i>).&#x2014;``Teeth of harpe of {\male} smaller than in <i>P. d. dasarada</i>, the proximal process shorter and often broader, and the ventral margin more or less dilated distally of the basal process. The apical process of the penis-sheath long, and usually narrower than in <i>P. d. dasarada</i>'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``Ground-colour varies from dark grey to creamy white marbled with oblique blackish lines. Two lateral and two subdorsal rows of fleshy tubercles, with an additional pair on segments 3 and 4, the subdorsal pair on segment 2 elongate; all the tubercles black and tipped with red except on segments 7, 8 and 11, on which they are creamy white, which colour on segments 7 and 8 is continued obliquely over almost the entire segments, forming a jagged white patch; segmental incisions dull brown. The black on the subdorsal tubercles forms two interrupted lines between which is a dorsal row of blackish spots. Osmeterium orange'' (<i>Hannyngton,</i> 1911 <i>b</i>, p. 875).</p>

<p>Was found, semi-gregarious, on <i>Aristolochia</i> at 8,000 feet on Liriya Kanta, near Naini Tal, on 25th July, 1909.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Carinate, stout and laterally dilated. Greenish-yellow with lilacine stripes, head truncate, an orange protuberance on back of thorax which is dorsally conical. Each abdominal segment with a pair of prominent tubercles on the back.</p>

<p>``The first larva to pupate was one found already spun up on a twig of <i>Viburnum</i> close to the food-plant, with little or no attempt at concealment. This remained quiescent for 48 hours before pupating, and the interval between spinning up and pupating was generally 3 days. Like all the known pup{\ae} of this group this species attaches itself vertically with a black silken body band and an anal pad. By the 6th August, 1909, all had been spun up. The first butterfly appeared on 20th April, 1910'' (<i>Hannyngton,</i> 1911 <i>b</i>, p. 875).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>18 <i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus dasarada dasarada</b> (Moore). (Fig. 23 <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio dasarada,</i> Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 96; Elwes, 1888, p. 425; Bingham, 1907, pp. 31&#x2013;2; Tytler, 1912, p. 589 (Naga Hills).</p>

<p><i>Panosmia dasarada,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 374.</p>

<p><i>Byasa dasarada,</i> Swinhoe, 1893, p. 312; Moore, 1902, p. 161 (part.), pl. 427, fig. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus</i> ab. <i>dasarada,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 266 (part.).</p>

<p><i>P{\ae}nasmia dasarada,</i> Kirby, 1896, p. 266.</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus dasarada,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 32, t. 19 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Byasa dasarada dasarada,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Papilio dasarada dasarada,</i> Jordan, 1928, p. 164, pl. vi, fig. 9 (genit.) (Sikkim, Assam, Burma).</p>

<p><i>Tros dasarada dasarada,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 45.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing above usually without a white discal spot in area 6. Underside of hind wing much darker than the fore wing. {\female} without a discal white spot in areas 1 <i>b</i> to 2 of the hind wing above.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;140 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 23 <i>b</i>).&#x2014;``The proximal process of the harpe long, dentate or simply conical; the dentition variable, most of the teeth of the ventral margin long, the distal end of the harpe more or less broadly rounded, dentate, the teeth pointing downward'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>18 <i>c</i>. <b>Polydorus dasarada barata</b> (Rothschild). (Fig. 23 <i>c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio philoxenus</i> ab. <i>barata,</i> rothschild, 1895, p. 266 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Papilio dasarada barata,</i> Rothschild, 1908, p. 168; Jordan, 1919 <i>a</i>, p. 32; id., 1928, p. 164, pl. vi, fig. 10 (genit.) (Tenasserim, Shan States, Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Byasa dasarada barata,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Tros dasarada barata,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 45.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Wings somewhat narrower than in <i>dasarada</i> Moore, and the hind wing below is paler from the costal margin to the cell; spot in area 6 absent below.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : 120&#x2013;140 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 23 <i>c</i>).&#x2014;``The proximal process of the harpe of the clasper flatter than in <i>P. d. dasarada</i>, the angle between it and the ventral margin smaller, the apex of the clasper more produced distad, the teeth more numerous than in the proceding race (<i>dasarada</i>), frequently arranged in two irregular rows, the apical teeth directed distad or upward rather than downward'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; recorded from the Shan States and Tenasserim; also in Tong-king.</p>

<p>19. <b>Polydorus crassipes</b> (Oberth\dd{u}r). (Fig. 24, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio crassipes,</i> Oberth\dd{u}r, 1893, p. 2, pl. 4, figs. 38, 38 <i>a</i> ({\male}) (Tong-king); Rothschild, 1895, p. 262; Fruhstorfer, 1901 <i>a</i>, pp. 113&#x2013;14 ({\female}); id., 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 170 ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, pp. 28, 34; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 31, t. 18 <i>a</i>; Tytler, 1915 <i>a</i>, p. 513; Jordan, 1928, p. 166, pl. vi, fig. 13 (genit.) (Manipur, Shan States, Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Byasa crassipes,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 171, pl. 434, fig. 2 ({\male}); Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Tros crassipes,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> without markings, excepting obscure red spos on hind wing; tail tipped with red below. Fore wing above dark fuliginous-black, with black veins, a longitudinal streak between the veins and streaks within the cell. Hind wing proximally broader than in <i>P. latreillei</i> and the marginal teeth placed before and behind the tail less produced; tail very broad and short, a small spot at the tip. Scent-wool greyish-white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing dull black, with two anterior marginal and two subanal lunules, an irregularly-shaped anal lunule, and the tail-tip bright crimson; all the spots large.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} and legs black; thorax and abdomen above black; front of head and thorax and abdomen beneath crimson; abdomen beneath with black segmental bands. Hind tibia of {\male} broader than in any other <i>Papilio.</i></p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 24).&#x2014;``At the base of the anal tergite of the {\male} there is a short process at each side; clasper with an apical sinus, below which there is a short sharp process not found in any other species of this group; harpe with a proximal, triangular, denticulate process, above which there is a short dentate ridge, ventral margin of harpe incrassate, gradually rounded, bearing a few small teeth, apex conical, sharply pointed, curved mesad, <i>i.e.,</i> away from the clasper, lying above the anal tergite when the claspers are closed'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Manipur</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Southern Shan States,</span> always very rare; also in Tong-king. Occurs at elevations of 1,000 and 2,500 feet.</p>

<p><b>Polydorus plutonius</b> (Oberth\dd{u}r). (Figs. 25 <i>a, b,</i> genitalia).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing very strongly lobed before and behind the tail; four or five red or reddish submarginal spots above, and six or seven on the underside. {\male} with brownish-black ground-colour above; {\female} blackish-brown, hind wing distal margin black. <i>Underside</i> ground-colour blackish-brown, the hind wing almost as pale as the fore wing. Scent-wool black-brown.</p>

<p>Head, collar, sides of thorax below, and abdomen below red mixed with black hairs; abdomen black above, below with transverse black edgings of hair to the segments.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 25).&#x2014;``Clasper large, recalling <i>P. dasarada,</i> as does also the harpe, which is proximally dilated into a process of variable size, the ventral margin usually dentate sometimes simple, with a large tooth in or near middle'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;West China and <span class="smallcaps">Eastern Himalayas</span>; the typical form confined to China.</p>

<p>20 <i>a</i>. <b>Polydorus plutonius pembertoni</b> (Moore). (Fig. 25 <i>a</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Byasa pembertoni,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 170, pl. 434, figs. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}) (Bhutan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcinous pembertoni,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 271 (part.; Bhutan); Bingham, 1907, p. 34.</p>

<p><i>Papilio plutonius pembertoni,</i> Oberth\dd{u}r, 1907, p. 137 (Sikkim); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 33; Riley, 1927, p. 119; Jordan, 1928, p. 170, pl. vi, fig. 23 (genit.) (at high elevations in Sikkim and Bhutan).</p>

<p><i>Byasa alcinous pembertoni,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233.</p>

<p><i>Tros alcinous pembertoni,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> fuliginous-black. Fore wing with broad pale adnervular streaks extending from near the base to the outer margin, present also in the cell. Hind wing with the cell and interspaces to near the margin entirely pale, veins black; a submarginal series of pinkish-white broad lunules in areas 2 to 6; tail immaculate.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing resembles the upperside; ground-colour paler, an additional submarginal pinkish-white lunule in area 1 that extends over the vein into area 2, and another very small one in area 7.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> pale olivescent greyish-fuliginous. Fore wing with black veins and streaks. Hind wing with the submarginal pale flesh-coloured lunules slightly larger than in the {\male}, the borders surrounding them dull black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> a little paler. Hind wing with six submarginal pale flesh-coloured lunules and a similarly coloured broad anal lunule as in the {\male}, the surrounding marginal border duller black.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 25 <i>a</i>).&#x2014;``Harpe nearly as in West Chinese specimens, strongly dentate'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Bhutan</span>; always very rare, and only at high elevations.</p>

<p>20 <i>b</i>. <b>Polydorus plutonius tytleri</b> (Evans). (Fig. 25 <i>b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Byasa alcinous tytleri,</i> Evans, 1923, pp. 233, 245 (Manipur).</p>

<p><i>Papilio plutonius tytleri,</i> Jordan, 1928, p. 170, pl. vi. fig. 24 (genit.) (Naga Hills).</p>

<p><i>Tros alcinous tytleri,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46.</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcinous impediens,</i> Tytler (<i>non</i> Roths.), 1915 <i>a</i>, p. 513, {\male}{\female} (Naga Hills, 7,000 ft.).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A quite distinct race, which differs also in the genitalia. Hind wing above with prominent black submarginal spots and a small red submarginal spot in area 2. {\female} pale brown with obscure traces of submarginal red spots in areas 3 to 6.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i> (fig. 25 <i>b</i>).&#x2014;``The harpe without the numerous teeth of the other races, the two specimens examined both with a simple triangular median tooth'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1928).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Manipur</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Naga Hills</span>; rare.</p>

<p>Tribe. II. PAPILIONINI.</p>

<p>The species of this group belong to the true Papilios and are known as the Fluted Papilios. They are chiefly <i>Citrus</i> feeders. The number of species is greater than in the other tribes of Papilionid{\ae}, and their distribution is more extensive. The Oriental species may be divided into the genera <i>Chilasa</i> and <i>Papilio.</i> The species of <i>Chilasa</i> possess a very distinctive pattern, being mimetic of Danaines and Eupl{\oe}ines. Some species of <i>Papilio</i> resemble forms of the genus <i>Polydorus.</i></p>

<p>``Antenn{\ae} without scales; the segments somewhat thinner towards their bases; the fine sensory hairs either pretty equally distributed over the ventral surface of the segment or concentrated on two large lateral, non-impressed areas. The tarsi likewise without sales, the dorsal spines separated from the rows of the under surface by a lateral, impressed, spineless longitudinal stripe. The abdominal margin of the hind wing in both sexes is simply curved downwards and forms a groove beneath. The hind wing of the {\male} has no scent-organ; on the other hand there are scent-scales on the fore wing of many species. In the Indo-Australian forms the wings of both sexes are always thickly scaled, also almost all the species have at least a few metallic (grey, green, or blue) scales.</p>

<p>``They young larv{\ae} resemble bird-droppings and bear on each segment more or less distinct humps or spines which, in most species, disappear later. According to the markings we have two principal types of larv{\ae} : the spotted larv{\ae} (<i>P. machaon, clytia,</i> etc.) and the oblique-banded larv{\ae} (<i>P. polytes, memnon, bianor.</i> etc.). Very many larv{\ae} live on species of <i>Citrus,</i> and <i>Xanthoxylon</i> is also a favourite food-tree.</p>

<p>``Pupa rough and leathery, usually resembling a piece of wood, the head mostly prolonged into two horns, which are rough on the innerside; wing-cases not so strongly dilated as in the <i>Aristolochia</i> Papilios (<i>Polydorus</i>), commonly scarcely projecting laterally; the dorsal protuberances of the abdomen are absent or very small'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Key to Genera of</i> Papilionini.</p>

<p>1. Pattern resembling Danaines or Eupl{\oe}ines. Abdomen with rows of white dots. Hind wing at the base with a white dot or spot. Larva without oblique bands, but with two or three rows of spines ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 106. <span class="smallcaps">Chilasa</span> Mre.,</p>

<p>2. Rarely with a Eupl{\oe}ine pattern. Abdomen without white dots (except in the <i>Castor</i> Group). Larva almost smooth, with oblique bands.</p>

<p>[p. 120. <span class="smallcaps">Papilio</span> Linn.,</p>

<p>Genus <b>CHILASA</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a,</i> p. 153 (type, <i>dissimilis</i> L.); id., 1903, p. 81; Evans, 1927, p. 25, pl. 1; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 41, 46.</p>

<p><i>Cadugoides,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 260; id., 1903 pp. 100&#x2013;1.</p>

<p><i>Menamopsis,</i> Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 433 (subgen.; type, <i>tavoyanus</i> Butl.).</p>

<p><i>Isamiopsis,</i> Moore, 1888, p. 284 (type, <i>telearchus</i> Hew.).</p>

<p>This is a genus of entirely mimetic species resembling Danaid{\ae}. It comprises four groups, of which only two are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>``Body spotted with white, the mesothorax above at least with a couple of white dots, the abdomen beneath with three rows and at the sides with two rows of these dots, the uppermost row sometimes obsolete, in other cases with the lower lateral dots so merged together that the abdomen is ringed with black and white; hind wing at the base with a white dot or spot, usually also a spot of the same colour at the base of the fore wing.</p>

<p>``Larva almost cylindrical, with reddish dots, larger light longitudinal patches and two or three rows of spines.</p>

<p>``Pupa likewise almost cylindrical, similar to a broken-off twig; wing-cases scarcely projecting at all laterally; head truncate, not produced into horns, the thoracic horn low, directed forwards; thorax and abdomen above with four rows of small round tubercles, the abdomen flattened beneath and hollowed out, lying close to the twig on which the pupa is fastened, the pad for the cremaster very strong'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Key to Groups and Species of</i> Chilasa.</p>

<p>A. Hind wing with the upper discocellular not half the length of vein 7; vein 7 at its point of origin placed farther distad than vein 2.</p>

<p>[p. 106. <span class="smallcaps">Agestor</span> Group,</p>

<p>1. Fore wing above black with bluish-grey or white markings ... ... ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Fore wing above dark brown, with a blue spot in end of cell and blue discal stripes ...</p>

<p>[p. 110. <i>slateri</i> (Hew.),</p>

<p>2. Hind wing with chestnut-red ground-colour and bluish-grey markings ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 106. <i>agestor</i> (Gray),</p>

<p>Hind wing black, with white or greyish-white markings ...</p>

<p>[p. 109. <i>epycides</i> (Hew.).</p>

<p>B. Hind wing with the upper discocellular nearly as long as vein 7; vein 7 at its point of origin placed nearer the base than vein 2 ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 112. <span class="smallcaps">Clytia</span> Group.</p>

<p>1. Hind wing below without a row of yellow marginal spots ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 112. <i>paradoxa</i> (Zink.),</p>

<p>2. Hind wing below with a row of yellow marginal spots</p>

<p>[p. 114, <i>clytia</i> (Linn.),</p>

<p><i>Agestor</i> Group.</p>

<p><b>Chilasa agestor</b> (Gray).</p>

<p>This species is an excellent mimic of <i>Danaus tytia</i> Gray. Fore wing for the most part whitish-grey, the veins and distal margin black. Hind wing chestnut-brown with grey-white markings. Abdomen with large light transverse spots.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Blackish-brown with two subdorsal and two lateral rows of spines, each with a spot of red at its base; anterior, middle, and posterior lateral patches of dull ochraceous, the latter two meeting on the dorsum; the rest of the larva spotted with black and red; beneath pale yellowish.</p>

<p>The young larva is at first of a reddish colour, but very soon turns black and white; it lies on the upper surface of a leaf, where it greatly and protectively resembles a bird's dropping.</p>

<p>Eggs laid on the young leaves of <i>Machilus odoratissimus</i> Nees, and perhaps on other Laurine{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Frequents shrubby woods; it skims lightly over the tops of the bushes without flapping the wings, and always returns again to the resting-place it has once chosen, on a projecting twig, even when it has been more than once disturbed. Occurs in the spring, and hibernates in the pupa stage.</p>

<p><i>distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-West India</span> to Tong-king, Central and South China and Formosa up to 6,000-7,000 feet.</p>

<p>Five subspecies are known, of which three are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>21 <i>a</i>. <b>Chilasa agestor agestor</b> (Gray). (Fig. 26, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agestor,</i> Gray, 1832, p. 32.</p>

<p><i>Cadugoides agestor,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 260; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 315; Moore, 1903, p. 101, pl. 508, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agestor agestor,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 360; Bingham, 1907, pp. 70, 71, fig. 16 ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 41.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa agestor agestor,</i> Evans, 1927, p. 234, pl. 2, fig. A 3.2; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46, pl. 1, fig. A 3.1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio senchalus,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 190 (Sikkim, Bhutan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio cresconius,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 190 (Upper Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black, with the following bluish-grey markings; :&#x2014;A very slender line along the costal margin; a broad stripe from the base in the cell that does not reach the apex of the same; two subapical spots; a long streak in area 1 <i>a</i>; two elongate broad stripes in area 1 divided by a thin black ill-defined line; broad rectangular patches in areas 2, 3, 4, and 6; a narrower inwardly obsolescent streak in area 5, and elongate spots in areas 8, 9, and 10; the discal patches in areas 1 to 4 are crossed transversely near their apices by a line of the ground-colour; a complete submarginal series of small whitish spots. Hind wing rich chestnut-red; cell filled by a trifid bluish-grey streak, followed at the bases of areas 2 to 6 by elongate bluish-grey spots; a narrow streak of the same colour from the base in area 1; a post-discal series of spots in areas 5, 6, and 7, and a more or less obsolescent submarginal series of dots also bluish-grey; the veins on the wing conspicuously paler than the ground-colour.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing as above except that the ground-colour on the apical area is dull brown, not black. Hind wing as above, but the ground-colour on the disc of the wing of a darker, deeper shade of chestnut; the post-discal series of spots more or less obscurely complete from areas 1 to 7; a submarginal series of small lunules.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black, the head and thorax variegated with bluish-grey spots, the abdomen with lateral transverse bars.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Dawna Range,</span> extending to Tong-king; not rare.</p>

<p>21 <i>b</i>, <b>Chilasa agestor chiraghshahi</b> (O. Bang-Haas).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agestor chiraghshahi,</i> O. Bang-Haas, 1933 <i>a</i>, p. 261 ({\male}, West Kashmir).</p>

<p>{\male}. Smaller and narrower than <i>govindra</i> (Moore). Hind wing with inner margin pale to yellow-brown; in 2 {\male}{\male} of the original series the inner area is without black markings.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Western Kashmir</span> : Punch State, Jhelum River, 3,600 m., May.</p>

<p>I have not seen specimens of this form.</p>

<p>21 <i>c</i>, <b>Chilasa agestor govindra</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Papilio govindra,</i> Moore, 1864, p. 101.</p>

<p><i>Cadugoides govindra,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 261; id., 1903, p. 100, pl. 509, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agestor govindra,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 36; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 599, pl. 5, fig. 22 <i>a&#x2013;d</i> (larva, pupa); Bingham, 1907, pp. 70, 71; Jordan 1909 <i>a</i> p. 41; Seitz, 1906, p. 13, t. 3 <i>b</i>; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa agestor govindra,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 233; id., 1932, p. 46.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Very closely resembles the nominotypical form, but can always be distinguished by the presence of a complete series of post-discal bluish-grey spots on the hind wing above. It is generally also smaller in both sexes than typical <i>agestor</i>, and on the hind wing above the ground-colour in the anterior inter-spaces is broadly centred along the middle with very dark brown, almost black; in the {\female}, on the contrary, the black sometimes all suppressed, and the hind wing frequently almost ochraceous.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 83&#x2013;100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; not rare.</p>

<p><b>Chilasa epycides</b> (Hewitson).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Markings grey-white with black vein-stripes, resembling some Danaine species. Hind wing with a round yellow anal spot. The {\female} more extended grey-white than the {\female}.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Occurs in the spring in sandy river-beds, and is single-brooded.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;West China and Formosa to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span>. Two subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p>22 <i>a</i>. <b>Chilasa epycides epycides</b> (Hewitson). (Fig. 27, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio epycides,</i> Hewitson, 1862&#x2013;6, <i>Pap.</i> pl. 6, fig. 16 ({\male}); Elwes, 1888, p. 423.</p>

<p><i>Papilio epycides epycides,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 361; Bingham, 1907, pp. 77&#x2013;3, fig. 17 ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 41, t. 29 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa epycides epycides,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dull black, with the following somewhat dingy white markings that resemble in their disposition the markings in <i>C. agestor</i> :&#x2014;Fore wing with two cell-streaks that diverge outwardly from the base and reach the apex, three shorter streaks between and above them at the apex; area 1 <i>a</i> with an elongate streak that does not reach the margin; two streaks in area 1 divided by a black line as in <i>agestor</i>; a series of more or less rectangular broad stripes in areas 2 to 6, with elongate spots in 7 and 8; a very slender costal streak from the base; a series of rounded submarginal spots in areas 1 to 5, and ill=defined subapical streaks in areas 6 and 7. Hind wing with the cell white, traversed longitudinally by two short black lines, the upper one forked near the apex; a discal series of short and broad white stripes in areas 2 to 6, a longer stripe in areas 1 and 7; a transverse series of post-discal and submarginal white spots beyond, the post-discal spots in areas 6 and 7 coalescent with the discal stripes in those areas; a prominent tornal ochraceous-yellow spot.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> resembles the upperside, the ground-colour outwardly on the fore wing and over the whole of the hind wing more or less of a chestnut tint; markings similar to those above but broader, and on the fore wing diffuse towards the apex; hind wing without a discal stripe in area 7, and the yellow anal spot edged with white on the inner side. Abdomen with three lateral rows of white spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. Markings puper and more extended grey-white, the submarginal spots of the hind wing specially enlarged.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 70&#x2013;90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">North Burma</span>; rare.</p>

<p>22 <i>b</i>. <b>Chilasa epycides hypochra</b> (Jordan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio epycides hypochra,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i> p. 41 (Shan States).</p>

<p><i>Chilasa epycides hypochra.</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46, pl. ii, fig. A 3.2 ({\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}. ``As light as light {\female}{\female} from Assam and Sikkim, the three grey discal stripes on the fore wing above, which are placed between the lower angle of the cell and vein 2, distally twice as broad as the black vein-stripes; costal margin of fore wing, especially beneath, more narrowly black than in {\male}{\male} of the typical form, and the under surface of the hind wing before the cell with a long, broad white-grey stripe, which extends almost to the submarginal spot, the costal margin from the base to the middle likewise white-grey'' (<i>Jordan</i>. 1908).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Karen Hills</span>; rare.</p>

<p><b>Chilasa slateri</b> (Hewitson).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Wings dark brown with entire margins which bear no fringe-spots. Fore wing above with bluish discal stripes in the Indian races, rather reduced in one. Hind wing with a yellow marginal anal spot as in <i>epycides</i>, and usually with white discal stripes.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The flight is slow, like the Eupl{\oe}ines, which it resembles. Occurs usually in low situations.</p>

<p><i>distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North India</span> to Sumatra and Borneo, in five subspecies, of which three occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>23 <i>a</i>. <b>Chilasa slateri slateri</b> (Hewitson).</p>

<p><i>Papilio slateri,</i> Hewitson, 1859, <i>Pap.</i> pl. 4, text (<i>nec</i> fig.) (part.); Elwes, 1888, p. 429.</p>

<p><i>Isamiopsis slateri,</i> Swinhoe, 1893, p. 314; Moore, 1903, p. 106, pl. 513, figs. 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>d</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio slateri slateri,</i> Rothschild, 1895, pp. 362&#x2013;3; Bingham, 1907, pp. 72&#x2013;3; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 41, t. 20 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa slateri slateri,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234, pl. 2, fig. A 3.3 ({\male}); id., 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 46, pl. ii, fig. A 3.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio slateri</i> f. <i>jaintinus,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 178; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 41.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing rich velvety black, slightly paler towards the apex and along the outer margin; two or three somewhat obscure spots or short streaks in apex of cell followed by an internervular series of slightly clavate, outwardly truncate, blue streaks that in certain lights have a violet tint; outwardly the ends of these streaks form a curve at some distance from the outer margin and inwardly they do not reach the bases of the interspaces. Hind wing dark chocolate-brown, the submarginal series of short white streaks of the underside show through very faintly; a comparatively large ochraceous tornal spot inwardly margined with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> dull chocolate-brown. Fore wing with the blue streaks of the upperside represented by diffuse white patches of scales. Hind wing with a small white spot at the extreme base; a submarginal series of inwardly diffuse white streaks in the interspaces and an ochraceous tornal spot as on the upperside.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; the thorax beneath sparsely speckled with white; abdomen with two lateral rows of small spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 80&#x2013;100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;Specimens with distal white streaks on the hind wing above have received the name of <b>jaintinus</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">North Burma</span>; usually rare, especially the {\female}.</p>

<p>23 <i>b</i>. <b>Chilasa slateri marginata</b> (Oberth\dd{u}r).</p>

<p><p>Papilio slateri</p> f. <i>marginata,</i> Oberth\dd{u}r, 1893, p. 3, pl. 4, fig. 35 ({\male}) (Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Papilio slateri marginate,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 41.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa slateri marginata,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; i.d., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46.</p>

<p><i>Papilio slateri marginata</i> ab. <i>cnephas,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 41.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing with shorter and narrower stripes than in the nominotypical form. Hind wing on both sides with a band of white streak-spots which are sometimes obsolescent, rarely quite absent above.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;Specimens in which the white streaks of the hind wing are obsolescent or absent have received the name of <b>cnephas</b> Jord.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Karen Hills</span>; rare. Also extending to Tong-king and Siam.</p>

<p>23 <i>c</i>. <b>Chilasa slateri tavoyanus</b> (Butler).</p>

<p><i>Papilio tavoyanus,</i> Butler, 1882, pp. 373&#x2013;4.</p>

<p><i>Menamopsis tavoyanus,</i> Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 433; Moore, 1903, p. 107, pl. 514, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>d</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio slateri tavoyanus,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 73; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 41.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa slateri tavoyanus,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 46.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clar{\ae},</i> Marshall, 1882 <i>a</i>, p. 42, pl. iv. fig. 5 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the blue patches indistinct, sometimes only traces of the stripes present, and these reaching only half-way to the margin; outer margin broadly rich chocolate-brown. Hind wing with a very prominent submarginal series of short white streaks, longer on the underside.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">South Burma</span>; rare.</p>

<p><i>Clytia</i> Group.</p>

<p><b>Chilasa paradoxa</b> (Zinken-Sommer).</p>

<p>A very interesting and variable species, of which a number of geographical races are known. Each of these races possesses two principal forms, the <i>paradoxa</i> form, resembling some of the blue Eupl{\oe}ines, and the <i>caunus</i> form, with a white patch on the hind wing and resembling another section of <i>Eupl{\oe}a</i>. These two forms, so distinct in their facies, show no difference in their genitalia, but each subspecies presents differences in this respect.</p>

<p>Allied to <i>C. clytia</i> Linn., but the cell of the hind wing narrower, especially towards the base; both wings with very small white marginal and submarginal spots; the latter stand in a quite regular row, which is anteriorly curved costad. Fore wing shot with blue.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Velvety black or green, with fleshy spines and round red lateral spots.</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Resembling a broken-off twig, green or brown, according to the colour of the twig to which it is fastened.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The species is rare, especially the <i>caunus</i> forms. The males are taken in woods at puddles on the road. The butterflies closely resemble the Eupl{\oe}ines, which they mimic, both in flight and colouring, and only when alarmed do they abandon the slow movement of a <i>Eupl{\oe}a</i> and fly off at great speed like a true <p>Papilio.</p></p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Northern India, Burma,</span> and the Malay Peninsula to Java and Palawan; more common in Borneo. Six subspecies known, only one, the largest, occurring in the Indian area.</p>

<p>24. <b>Chilasa paradoxa telearchus</b> (Hewitson).</p>

<p><i>Papilio telearchus,</i> Hewitson, 1852, p. 22, pl. 6, fig. 3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Eupl{\oe}opsis telearchus,</i> Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 443; Doherty; 1889, p. 130; de Nic\'eville, 1889 <i>b</i>, p. 169, pl. A, fig. 5 ({\female}); Moore, 1903, p. 96, pl. 511, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Isamiopsis telearchus,</i> Moore, 1888, p. 284; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 314.</p>

<p><i>Papilio paradoxus telearchus,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 78, pl. xii. fig. 87 ({\female}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 43, t. 32 <i>a</i>; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 894.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa paradoxa telearchus,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47</p>

<p><i>Papilio danisepa,</i> Butler, 1885, p. 343.</p>

<p><i>Isamiopsis danisepa,</i> Swinhoe, 1893, p. 314.</p>

<p><i>Eupl{\oe}opsis danisepa,</i> de Nic\'eville, 1895, p. 366, pl. Q, fig. 48 ({\female}) (Upper Burma : Katha District, 3,000 ft.).</p>

<p><i>Papilio caunus danisepa,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 377; Bingham, 1907, pp. 79&#x2013;80.</p>

<p><i>Papilio paradoxa telearchus</i> f. <i>danisepa,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 44, t. 32 <i>b</i>; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 895.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa paradoxa telearchus</i> f. <i>danisepa,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234, pl. 2 ({\male}); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47, pl. ii. fig. A 3.4 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside of fore wing dark brown richly shot with blue, a short oval streak or large spot and a  post-discal and submarginal complete series of spots bluish-white; both the series curve inwards on the wing anteriorly, the inner series of spots elongate. Hind wing rich hair-brown, with or without a submarginal series of white specks that increase in size anteriorly.</i></p>

<p><i>Underside</i> rich chocolate-brown. Fore wing with an indistinct short cell-streak, the submarginal white spots smaller than above. Hind wing as above. Cilia dark brown alternated sparsely with white.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen velvety brown, the head and anterior portion of thorax and the thorax and abdomen beneath sparsely spotted with white.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside of fore wing with basal half dull brown, apical half brown shot with brilliant blue; markings as in the {\male}, but larger and whiter, the post-discal spots more elongate. Hind wing brown, with a series of comparatively broad whitish streaks in the cell and between the veins, the latter ending in a post-discal series of whitish spots. Cilia brown, white between the veins.</i></p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with pale dull brown markings much as on the upperside, but larger, more diffuse, with the addition on the fore wing of whitish streaks in the cell and between the veins posteriorly. Head, thorax, and abdomen more fully spotted with white than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;150 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>danisepa</b> Butl.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> rich velvety brown shot with blue. Fore wing with the apical third of cell, four short streaks beyond in areas 4, 5, 6, and 9, and a submarginal series of spots curved inwards anteriorly, bluish-white. Hind wing with the cell white, and a series of discal stripes in areas 1 to 7, with an incomplete submarginal series of minute spots also white; the stripes in areas 4 and 5 short, those above and below these gradually longer.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> brown without blue gloss, and markings as above, the submarginal series of spots on the hind wing complete.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but the blue gloss on both wings more restricted, the ground-colour paler brown, somewhat of a rich golden-bronze, the white markings fuller and broader.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;``On the wing it appears very like <i>Eupl{\oe}a diocletiana</i> and has the same habit of settling on the damp sand'' (<i>Ollenbach,</i> 1921).</p>

<p>``I first came across this magnificent butterfly on the Tannjah Pass, 1,000 feet, over the Dawnat Mountains in Tenasserim, and until I had caught and examined it, mistook it for an extraordinarily large specimen of <i>Eupl{\oe}a rhadamanthus.</i> It is apparently sometimes, notwithstanding its disguise, attacked and preyed on by the Pygmy Falcon (<i>Microhicrax c{\oe}rulescens</i> Linn.), as in the nest-hole of a pair of these birds I once found the fragment of a fore wing of a butterfly which was identified by the late Mr. de Nic\'eville as belongsing to this form'' (<i>Bingham,</i> 1907).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; rare, especially the {\female}. The form <i>danisepa</i> rarer than <i>telearchus</i>. Occurs also in Tong-king and Siam.</p>

<p><b>Chilasa clytia</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>This species is probably the progenitor of <i>paradoxa</i>, which represents it in Java, Sumatra, and Borneo. It is much more common, and has two principal forms which are about equally common; its range is more extended than that of <i>paradoxa</i>. It is very variable, but the sexes are similar, and the geographical races differ somewhat in their genitalia.</p>

<p>The two chief forms are usually found together, but in the Andamans, Philippines, and Lesser Sunda Islands only one form occurs. The form <i>clytia,</i> with its variations, resembles species of <i>eupl{\oe}a,</i> whilst the form <i>dissimilis</i> resembles various <i>Danaus.</i></p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Both wings with light marginal spots; hind wing sinuous between the veins. Frons with two white spots. Abdomen in the light forms with the white spots merged together into longitudinal lines, in the dark forms usually separated, and those of the subdorsal row small and partly suppressed.</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;``Spherical, waxy-looking, and often somewhat uneven on the surface, orange-yellow'' (<i>Bell</i>, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Velvety black or dark green, with a dorso-lateral row of carmine circular spots. A creamy dorsal band on segments 3 to 7, narrowing at both ends and flanked by a broad, lateral, similarly coloured band; also a broad creamy band on segments 11 to 14 externally. Two lateral rows of sharp spines on segments 1 to 4, and a single row on the other segments. Osmeterium light watery indigo-blue. Length 55 mm. (from <i>Bell,</i> 1912).</p>

<p>Feeds on various Laurine{\ae} (laurels, cinnamon, etc.).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Cylindrical, resembling a dead piece of stick broken off short at the top; generally attached to a branch projecting at an angle of 45&#xb0;. The whole is rough and coloured to represent dead bark. Cremaster dorsally convex and trapeze-shaped, and beneath set plentifully with short, strong, red-brown suspensory hooklets. Surface dull, rugose, and pitted all over with slight tubercular risings. Colour a light pinky-brown washed with smoky-black, especially on the dorsal parts, where it obscures the ground-colour nearly completely with the exception of the subdorsal region of segments 6 and 7; the flat dorsal portion of segment 2 is light yellowish-brown, this colour extending to parts of the thorax and head. Length, 38 mm.; breadth, 8 mm.'' (<i>Bell</i>, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The butterfly is taken in large numbers at puddles on the sandy banks of streams, and also at flowers.</p>

<p>Bell (1912), writing on its occurrence in Southern India, says : ``It is very plentiful in the monsson months and spends the dry months in the pupa; if the pupa is formed in November it very often does not produce a butterfly until the April or May following. The full-grown larva does not seem to be much attacked by enemies; the young larva, however, is very liable to destruction, mostly, it is supposed, by spiders; it is certainly parasitised less than any other <i>Papilio</i> larva.</p>

<p>``In flight it can imitate the <i>eupl{\oe}a</i> or <i>Danais limniace,</i> which it resembles, but can also fly very fast when alarmed. It is fond of circling round the tops of the hills or peaks in the jungle, well above the trees. The form <i>dissimilis</i> is occasionally present, but always in fewer numbers.</p>

<p>``At rest the wings are held over the back like the <i>eupl{\oe}a</i> and <i>Danaus,</i> but sometimes assumes the ordinary horizontal Papilionid position.''</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;China, Formosa, and Hainan to the Malay Peninsula; also in Palawan, the Philippines, and islands of the Timor group. Four subspecies are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>5 <i>a</i>. <b>Chilasa clytia clytia</b> (Linn{\ae}us). (Figs. 28, 29; Pl. I, fig. 5, larva, fig. 6, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia,</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 479; Aitken, 1887, p. 37; Rothschild, 1895, pp. 364&#x2013;7, no. 136 <i>a</i>; Mackinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 584 (larva, pupa); Seitz, 1907, t. 7 <i>a</i>; Bingham, 1907, p. 75. fig. 14 <i>c</i> (neuration), fig. 18 <i>a</i> ({\male}); Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 895.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia clytia,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia,</i> Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Moore, 1903, p. 82, pl. 501, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia clytia,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47, pl. ii, fig. A 3.5 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio panope,</i> Esper (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1798, p. 232, pl. 57, fig. 2; Elwes, 1888, p. 430; Watson, 1890 <i>a,</i> p. 268; Bethem, 1891, p. 325.</p>

<p><i>Papilio panope,</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 479; Cramer, 1780 <i>b,</i> p. 13, pl. 295, figs. E. F; Marshall, 1882 <i>a</i>, p. 43.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa panope,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 261; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 145; id., 1893, p. 314; Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 137; Moore, 1903, p. 88, pl. 505, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia panope,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 269; Bingham, 1907, pp. 75, 78, fig. 18 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>panope,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Papilio dissimilis,</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 479; Clerck, 1759, t. 16, fig. 2 (forma typica); Cramer, 1775, p. 129, pl. 82, figs. C, D; Horsfield &amp; Moore, 1857, p. 91, pl. 2, figs. 3, 3 <i>a</i> (larva), 3 <i>b</i> (pupa); Watson, 1890 <i>a</i>, p. 268; id., 1891, p. 54.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa dissimilis,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 153, pl. 57, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> (larva); id., 1882, p. 261; Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 145; de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b</i>, p. 52, Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 137; Hampson, 1889, p. 363; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 314.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> ab. <i>dissimilis,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 367.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>dissimilis,</i> Jordan, 1969 <i>a</i>, p. 42, t. 20 <i>d</i>; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 895.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia</i> f. <i>dissimilis,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47, pl. ii. fig. A 3.5 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio casyapa,</i> Moore, 1879 <i>a</i>, p. 143.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa casyapa,</i> de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b,</i> p. 52; Moore, 1903, p. 84, pl. 502, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> (larva, pupa, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> ab. <i>casyapa,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 367.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>casyapa,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> ab. <i>commixtus,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 367.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>commixtus,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 42, t. 20 <i>d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia</i> f. <i>commixtus,</i> Evans, 1923. p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia</i> f. <i>dissimillima,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 245; id., 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 47.</p>

<p>The subspecies <i>clytia</i> is subject to much variability, especially in the dark <i>clytia</i> form, Altogether six forms are distinguished, and many lesser forms occur, especially in the variation of the hind wing markings, where the light marginal spots are suppressed or much enlarged.</p>

<p>Form <b>clytia</b> Linn. (Fig. 28 <i>a</i>, {\male}; 28 <i>b</i>, venation).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> velvety black or soft dark brown. Fore wing submarginal white spots outwardly truncate or emarginate; the spot in area 4 shifted inwards out of line; those in areas 6, 7, and 8 oblique to the costa, the lowest and the upper two spots elongate; a series of smaller marginal white spots, two in area 1, one above the other, and two in area 8; a single subapical spot between the marginal and submarginal series. Hind wing with a discal series of inwardly conical and outwardly emarginate, triangular, white streaks in areas 1 to 5; a submarginal series of four white lunules in areas 2 to 5, in 6 and 7 a transverse oblong submarginal white spot; a prominent tornal yellow spot broadly divided across the middle by a bar of the ground-colour.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with ground-colour varying from soft pale brown to rich dark velvety brown. Fore wing markings as above. Hind wing with similar markings to those above, but with a marginal row of comparatively large, very conspicuous yellow spots; these are separated from the white lunules by a series of short transverse detached spots of the ground-colour.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>Form <b>casyapa</b> Moore.&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Upperside of fore wing brown-black, and beside the marginal spots has two rows of discal patches, of which the proximal ones are usually diffuse. Hind wing black-brown from the base to beyond apex of cell, post-discal sagittate spots, submarginal angular spots, and mostly yellow marginal ones.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Northern India.</span></p>

<p>From <b>panope</b> Linn. (Fig. 29 <i>b</i>).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour pale brown. Fore wing with a submarginal row of spots, and hind wing with shorter discal sagittate spots. Usually the marginal and submarginal spots of the fore wing are merged together, forming three large apical patches.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Northern India.</span></p>

<p>Form <b>commixtus</b> Roths.&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Fore wing brown-black with faint discal stripes and smaller spots before the outer margin. Hind wing with long discal internervular streaks, but the cell for the most part pure brown-black.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>; very rare.</p>

<p>Form <b>dissimilis</b> Linn. (Fig. 29 <i>a</i>, {\male}).&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour black of creamy-white stripes and spots. Upperside of fore wing with four cell-streaks coalescent at the base, four subapical spots, a long streak in area 1 <i>a</i>, in area 1 two streaks with, beyond them, two spots which are more or less coalescent with them, in area 2 a broad streak with an outwardly emarginate spot beyond, in area 3 a spot at the base and one beyond, in area 4 a single similar spot, in 5 and 6 elongate streaks, and in 8 and 9 much smaller elongate spots; submarginal and marginal markings as in form <i>clytia.</i> Hind wing with the cell white; long discal white streaks that reach quite up to the outer margin of the cell and area continued anteriorly to the costa by elongate streaks in areas 6 and 7; two spots in area 8 and a slender costal streak; submarginal and marginal markings as in form <i>clytia.</i></p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the upperside, the markings larger, and the hind wing with marginal yellow spots as in form <i>clytia.</i></p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern India</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">North-West Himalayas;</span> not rare.</p>

<p>Form <b>dissimillima</b> Evans.&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. The pale markings are dusted with black and are more restricted.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">North-East India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span></p>

<p>25 <i>b</i>. <b>Chilasa clytia lankeswara</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Papilio lankeswara,</i> Moore, 1879 <i>a,</i> p. 143.</p>

<p><i>chilas lankeswara,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 154, pl. 56, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> (larva), 2 <i>b</i> (pupa); id., 1903, p. 86.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia lankeswara,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 368; Jordan 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 43, t. 20 <i>b</i>; Bingham, 1907, p. 77.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia lankeswara,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytioides,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 154, pl. 56, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia lankeswara</i> f. <i>dissimila,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 245; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Ground-colour pale brown. Fore wing with the submarginal spots small.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 90&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>dissimila</b> Evans.&#x2014;{\male}{\female}. Yellowish-brown with broad stripes.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>25 <i>c</i>. <b>Chilasa clytia papone</b> (Westwood).</p>

<p><i>Papilio papone,</i> Westwood, 1872, p. 94, pl. 3, fig. 2.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> ab. <i>papone,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 367.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>papone,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 42; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p. 895.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia onpape</i> f. <i>papone,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Papilio onpape</i>, Moore, 1878 <i>a</i>, p. 840; Distant, 1885, p. 355, pl. 27, fig. 5; de Nic\'eville, 1890, p. 387; Watson, 1891 <i>a</i>, p. 53.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa onpape,</i> Elwes &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 433; Moore, 1903, p. 86, pl. 503, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>onpape,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 42&#x2013;3.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia onpape,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia onpape,</i> ab. <i>janus,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1901 <i>b</i>, p. 413; id., 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 181 (Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Chilasa janus,</i> Moore, 1903, p. 87, pl. 504, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>c</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia</i> f. <i>janus,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia</i> f. <i>janus,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Fore wing above dark indigo-blue with or without obscure dusky post-discal spots; hind wing above with prominent pale distal streaks.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;(1) Fore wing above with the white spots absent or replaced by black spots, which may be white-centred. Hind wing above with the pale streaks sometimes as extensive as in <i>commixtus</i>. Form <b>janus</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p>(2) Paler brown, with one or several spots at the apex of the fore wing prolonged to the distal margin. Form <b>onpape</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Lower Burma</span>; occurring also in Siam and Tong-king.</p>

<p>25 <i>d</i>. <b>Chilasa clytia flavolimbatus</b> (Oberth\dd{u}r).</p>

<p><i>Papilio dissimilis</i> v. <i>flavolimbatus,</i> Oberth\dd{u}r, 1879, p. 101.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa flavolimbatus,</i> Wood-Mason, 1880, p. 238; Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 253, pl. 14, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio clytia flavolimbatus,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 370; Bingham, 1907, p. 78; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 43, t. 20 <i>d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Chilasa flavolimbata,</i> Moore, 1903, p. 93, pl. 507, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Chilasa clytia flavolimbatus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 234; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. A <i>dissimilis</i> form, but larger, the white markings similar but proportionately larger, with the exception of the cell streaks in both wings, which are narrower and less strongly defined. Hind wing with a marginal row of ochraceous-yellow spots on both sides, those of the underside much larger than n the <i>dissimilis</i> form.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>PAPILIO</b> Linn{\ae}us.</p>

<p><i>Papilio,</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 458, no. 203; Latreille, 1805, p. 108; id., 1810, p. 440 (type, <i>machaon</i> Linn.); Rothschild, 1895, pp. 167&#x2013;463; Moore, 1903, pp. 33&#x2013;9; Bingham, 1907, pp. 10&#x2013;11; Jordan, 1908, pp. 11&#x2013;12; Evans, 1927, p. 25, pls. 2&#x2013;5; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 47&#x2013;53; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 145 (type, <i>machaon</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Achillides,</i> H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 85; Scudder, 1875, p. 100 (type, <i>paris</i> L.).</p>

<p><i>Princeps,</i> H\dd{u}bner, 1806&#x2013;19, fig. 116 (<i>demoleus</i> Linn., 1764); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 149 (type, <i>demoleus</i> Linn., 1764 = <i>demodocus</i> Esp., 1798).</p>

<p><i>Menelaides,</i> H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 84; Scudder, 1875, p. 216 (type, <i>polytes</i> Linn.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 151 (type, <i>polytes</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Iphiclides,</i> H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 82; Scudder, 1872, p. 65 (type, <i>podalirius</i>, Linn.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 151 (type, <i>padalirius</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Iliades,</i> H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 88; Scudder, 1875, p. 196 (type, <i>memnon</i> Linn.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 149 (type, <i>memnon</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Harimala,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a,</i> p. 145 (type, <i>crino</i> Fabr.).</p>

<p><i>Charus,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 149 (type, <i>helenus</i> Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Sainia,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 26 (type, <i>protenor</i> Cram.).</p>

<p><i>Sarbaria,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 258 (type, <i>polyctor</i> Bdv.).</p>

<p><i>Araminta,</i> Moore, 1886, p. 50 (type, <i>demolion</i> Cram.); id., 1902, pp. 218-19.</p>

<p><i>Pangeranopsis,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 374 (subgen.; type, <i>elephenor</i> Doubl.).</p>

<p><i>Tamera,</i> Moore, 1888, p. 284 (type, <i>caster</i> Westw.).</p>

<p><i>Sadengia,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 213 (type, <i>nephelus</i> Bdv.).</p>

<p><i>Mimbyasa,</i> Evans, 1911, p. 972 (type, <i>janaka</i> Mre.).</p>

<p>The characters of this genus have been given in general with the account of the tribe. The genus differs from <i>Chilasa</i> essentially in the larva, which is comparatively smooth, being spiny only in the early stages, and generally has oblique bands.</p>

<p>The <i>castor</i> group of <i>Papilio</i> resembles <i>Chilasa</i> in having white dots on the body and a white spot at the base of the wings beneath. The other groups have white dots on the head and prothorax above and on the palpi, but none on the abdomen. Fore wing of the male often with wolly scent-stripes. The males are rarely mimetic, but the females of a number of species resemble species of <i>Polydorus,</i> and in some cases are polymorphic.</p>

<p>The genus can be divided into a number of groups, of which six are represented in the Indian area. These can be roughly divided into those which have red basal markings on the underside and those which have not.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The flight is powerful and varies in style; they are very active and remain on the wing for a long time. Although fond of bright light they do not generally bask in the sun, but when they do the wings are spread and the fore wing covers a large part of the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The genus <i>Papilio</i> contains by far a greater number of species than any other genus of the family, and includes many which are rare and others which are very common. The {\female} is often much scarcer than the {\male}, but probably has different habits. The genus covers a similar range to that of the tribe. In the Indian area thirty-one species are recorded, not including subspecies.</p>

<p><i>Key to Groups and Speices of</i> Papilio.</p>

<p>A. Wings beneath with prominent red basal markings. {\male} with hind wing above black, never a white band, but with grey or bluish-white scaling which sometimes forms a broad band of stripes, rarely with white patches. {\female} either similar to {\male} or very different, with white, yellowish or reddish discal area on hind wing, mimicking species of <i>Polydorus.</i></p>

<p>[p. 124. <span class="smallcaps">Memnon Group,</span></p>

<p>{\female}.</p>

<p>1. Head red, abdomen with a lateral red stripe ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 135. <i>bootes</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>Head and abdomen not marked with red.</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Fore wing above with a pale blue sub-marginal band ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 124, <i>polymnestor</i> Cram.,</p>

<p>Fore wing above without a pale blue submarginal band ...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>3. Hind wing above with a broad pale blue discal band ... ... ...</p>

<p><i>mayo</i> Atk., p. 134.</p>

<p>Hind wing above without a blue discal band</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>4. Hind wing above without a tornal white-edged ocellus ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 127. <i>memnon</i> Linn.,</p>

<p>Hind wing above with a tornal white-edged ocellus</p>

<p>[p. 137. <i>rhetenor</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>{\female}.</p>

<p>1. Head red, abdomen with lateral red stripe ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 135. <i>bootes</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>Head and abdomen not marked with red.</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Fore wing above with a pale blue submarginal band ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 124. <i>polymnestor</i> Cram.,</p>

<p>Fore wing above without a blue submarginal band... ... ...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>3. Hind wing without a tail</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>Hind wing tailed ... ... ...</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>4. Hind wing above with a large white discal area ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 130. <i>memnon</i> Linn.,</p>

<p>Resembles the {\male}. Hind wing below with a white stripe along the inner margin.</p>

<p>[p. 130. <i>memnon</i> Linn.,</p>

<p>5. Abdomen yellow</p>

<p><i>memnon</i> Linn.,</p>

<p>Abdomen black ... ... ...</p>

<p>6. [p. 130.</p>

<p>Tail tipped red and white. Hind wing above with white cell-spot and discal white patch ... ... ...</p>

<p><i>mayo</i> Atk., p. 135.</p>

<p>Tail very broad. Hind wing above with discal white patch and submarginal red lunules</p>

<p>[p. 137. <i>rhetenor</i> Westrw.,</p>

<p>B. Underside of both wings without red basal markings; hind wing with cell black, not sprinkled with white or yellow scales; sexes alike; no tails ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 140. <span class="smallcaps">Protenor</span> Group,</p>

<p>Hind wing above in {\male} with a subcostal white stripe ... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 140. <i>protenor</i> Cram.,</p>

<p>C. Sexes similar. Upperside of body and wings with glossy metallic-blue scaling, either uniformly distributed or with a metallic patch or band. Underside always dark.</p>

<p><span class="smallcaps">Paris</span> Group. p. 142.</p>

<p>1. Hind wing below with cell black, not sprinkled with yellow or white scales. Upperside without green or blue patches.</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>Hind wing below with cell and basal area sprinkled with yellow or white scales. Upperside with green or blue patches or bands ... ... ...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing above without red lunules in areas 2 and 3; abdomen buff at the sides.</p>

<p>[p. 143. <i>elephenor</i> Doubl.,</p>

<p>Hind wing above with one to three red spots; abdomen black ... ... ...</p>

<p><i>dialis</i> Leech, p. 143.</p>

<p>3. Upperside without a broad green band, but usually with a broad green subapical patch on hind wing above ... ... ...</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>Upperside of both wings with broad green discal band ... ... ...</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>4. Hind wing above with the green patch not prominent... ... ...</p>

<p><i>bianor</i> Cram., p. 144.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with a prominent green or blue patch... ... ...</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>5. Hind wing above with inner edge of green patch more or less straight, but ragged and diffuse... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 145. <i>polyctor</i> Boisd.,</p>

<p>Hind wing above with inner edge of green patch curved and sharply defined. {\male} without woolly streaks on fore wing... ...</p>

<p><i>paris</i> Linn., p. 148.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with the blue patch longer in area 6 than in 5; red submarginal lunules prominent... ... ...</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>6. Fore wing above with a green post-discal band... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 151. <i>arcturus</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>Fore wing above with narrow pale yellow discal band... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 154. <i>krishna</i> Moore,</p>

<p>7. Fore wing above with green band not entering cell; tail tipped with green... ...</p>

<p><i>crino</i> Fabr., p. 155.</p>

<p>Fore wing above with green band entering cell; tail black... ... ...</p>

<p>8.</p>

<p>8. Fore wing above with broad green band which broadly enters the cell... ...</p>

<p>[p. 156. <i>buddha</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>Fore wing above with narrow green band which just enters the cell</p>

<p>[p. 157. <i>palinurus</i> Fbr.,</p>

<p>D. Both sexes without a tail, and entirely without a blue gloss. Both wings above and hind wing beneath thickly dusted with yellowish scales. Fore wing with a white discocellular dot. Abdomen with white subdorsal dots... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 159. <span class="smallcaps">Castor</span> Group,</p>

<p>1. Fore wing above with a series of equal submarginal white spots in a regular row... .</p>

<p>[p. 159, <i>dravidarum</i> W.-M.,</p>

<p>Fore wing above without white submarginal spots... ... ...</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing above with a series of equal submarginal white spots in areas 1 to 6, spot in 7 smaller. {\female} with these spots dusky and becoming smaller anteriorly... ...</p>

<p>[p. 161. <i>mahadeva</i> Moore,</p>

<p>Hind wing above with large discal white spots in areas 4 to 6, and a small spot in 7. {\female} with submarginal spots on fore wing above and submarginal lunules on hind wing.</p>

<p>[p. 162. <i>castor</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>E. Body black, with white dots on head and pronotum and thin white lines on underside of abdomen, sometimes absent. Wings black. Hind wing tailed; an anterior discal white patch or with a yellowish or white discal band. Sexes similar except in <i>polytes,</i> some females of which resemble species of <i>Polydorus</i>... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 166. <span class="smallcaps">Helenus</span> Group.</p>

<p>1. Fore wing above without a prominent pale discal band from apex to inner margin.</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>A pale discal band across both wings.</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing band entering apex of cell.</p>

<p>[p. 184. <i>liomedon</i> Moore,</p>

<p>Hind wing band not entering cell... ... ...</p>

<p><i>demolion</i> Cram.,</p>

<p>3. Hind wing above with a large white sub-apical patch... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 186. 4.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with discal white band of white or red spots... ... ...</p>

<p>8.</p>

<p>4. Hind wing below with pale scales in the cell arranged in three prominent streaks... ...</p>

<p>5.</p>

<p>Hind wing below with pale scales in the cell uniformly spread</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>5. Hind wing below with red submarginal lunules... ... ...</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>Hind wing below with yellow submarginal lunules... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 171. <i>chaon</i> Westw.,</p>

<p>6. Hind wing above with a white patch extending over areas 5 to 7... ....</p>

<p><i>helenus</i> Linn., p. 166.</p>

<p>Hind wing above with discal white patch extending over areas 4 to 7... ...</p>

<p><i>iswara</i> White, p. 170.</p>

<p>7. Hind wing above with discal white patch extending over areas 5 to 7; below with a complete set of red lunules... ...</p>

<p>[p. 173. <i>noblei</i> de Nic\'ev.,</p>

<p>Hind wing above with discal patch extending over areas 4 to 7; below with complete series of blue lunules beyond the white patch... ... ...</p>

<p><i>fuscus</i> Goeze, p. 174.</p>

<p>8. Sexes alike. Hind wing above with discal white band conspicuously wider at the middle. Fore wing below with one or more submarginal white spots... ...</p>

<p>[p. 175. <i>hipponous</i> Feld.,</p>

<p>{\female} usually different to the {\male}, in which case with red or white discal spots on hind wing. {\male} hind wing above with discal white band of even width. Fore wing above with prominent marginal white spots</p>

<p><i>polytes</i> Linn., p. 176.</p>

<p>F. Body beneath entirely yellow, or at most with black lines. Fore wing beneath with base of cell striped with pale yellow. Hind wing for the greater part, or at least a large central area, pale yellow</p>

<p>[p. 187. <span class="smallcaps">Demoleus</span> Group.</p>

<p>1. No tails</p>

<p><i>demoleus</i> Linn.,</p>

<p>Tailed... ... ...</p>

<p>2. [p. 187.</p>

<p>2. Upperside with veins not black; entirely yellow, with narrow black bands</p>

<p><i>alexanor</i> Esp., p. 191.</p>

<p>Upperside with veins black... ... ...</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>3. Fore wing above with basal fourth black, sprinkled with yellow scales</p>

<p>[p. 192. <i>machaon</i> Linn.,</p>

<p>Fore wing above with a yellow streak from the base along lower edge of cell, and basal fourth of cell yellow-streaked.</p>

<p><i>xuthus</i> Linn., p. 198.</p>

<p><b>Papilio polymnestor</b> Cramer.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a pale blue discal band which is obsolescent anteriorly. Hind wing with distal area pale blue, enclosing a row of black discal patches and similar row of submarginal spots, some of the latter united with the black distal margin.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> opaque black. Fore wing with an elongate spot of dark red at base of cell; the post-discal transverse streaks as on the upperside, but grey tinged with ochraceous and extended to the costa; in some specimens similar, but narrow streaks also in the cell. Hind wing with five irregular small patches of red at base, the outer three-fourths of wing touched with ochraceous, but generally narrower than the blue on the upperside; the inner margin of the grey area crosses the wing beyond the cell; post-discal and submarginal black spots as above. In some specimens this grey area is greatly restricted, its inner margin crossing the wing well beyond the apex of the cell; the submarginal spots merged completely with the marginal spots, forming a comparatively broad marginal black band.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen blackish-brown.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but the internervular streaks on the fore wing paler, extended into the cell on both sides of the wing. Hind wing with paler blue and grey areas. In some specimens there is a diffuse short crimson streak at the base of the cell of the fore wing above.</p>

<p><i>Egg.</i>&#x2014;``Light green when first laid, but becomes orange-yellow after some hours' exposure. It is spherical and 1.8 mm. in diameter. Surface smooth'' (<i>Bell</i>, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Rich velvety darkish grass-green on dorsal portions, with yellowish shade above the lateral white line of segments 2 to 5. Body covered with extremely minute erect hairs. There is a small dorso-lateral, short, fleshy tubercle near hind margin of segment 13, coloured white-grey; a similarly coloured, very slightly raised line which separates the green dorsal colour of body from the hind slope, and this line is continued forward and down, still separating the dorsal green from the lateral grey, to join the whitish subspiracular line at the front margin of segment 12 (from <i>Bell</i>, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``The pupa is only green when it is formed amongst green leaves. If it is formed on a grey branch out of their influence, or in a cage in captivity the colour may be quite different'' (<i>Bell,</i> 1912).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i> (from <i>Bell,</i> 1912).&#x2014;The eggs are laid singly on the upperside of a leaf within about 10 feet from the ground, and always on a plant bearing young leaves. The eggs are often parasitized, but the larva suffers less from these enemies.</p>

<p>Pupation takes place suspended from the underside of a leaf-stalk or from a thin twig, the loop being moderately long.</p>

<p>The imago emerges after twenty-one days, in the most favourable case; in captivity a pupa will often lie over for months.</p>

<p>The butterfly does not fly high as a rule, but will occasionally rise to the tops of trees; both sexes are commonly found on flowers. The males may be often seen drinking on wet mud or sand at the commencement of the monsoons. The insect is much commoner in the hills at low elevations and in jungle country than in the plains, and is not found in regions of very scanty rainfall.</p>

<p>Flight powerful and quick, and when alarmed the insect dodges with great alacrity. At rest the wings are spread horizontally.</p>

<p>Like all others of its class it will come to a decoy&#x2014;a dead specimen pinned on a leaf or on the ground with its wings spread open&#x2014;and even to a piece of light blue paper similarly exposed.</p>

<p>Food-plant, Rutace{\ae}. In the forests of Western India, south of Bombay, the commonest food-plant is <i>Paramigyna monophylla</i> Wgt., a large, climbing, armed shrub with a simple leaf and a round green berry.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Southern India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Bengal,</span> Calcutta; two subspecies.</p>

<p>26 <i>a</i>. <b>Papilio polymnestor polymnestor</b> Cramer. (Fig. 30 <i>a, b,</i> genitalia; Pl. I, fig. 10, larva, fig. 11, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polymnestor,</i> Cramer, 1775, p. 83, pl. 53, figs. A, B; Horsfield &amp; Moore, 1857, p. 101. pl. 3, figs, 1, 1 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa); Gosse, 1883, p. 229, pl. xxviii, figs. 23, 24 (genitalia); de Nic\'eville, 1885 <i>b</i>, p. 51; Elwes, 1888, p. 430; Bingham, 1907, p. 50; Bell, 1911, p. 1115, pl. D 4, fig. 27 ({\male}), 27 <i>a</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polymnestor polymnestor,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 329; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 70, t. 26 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48, pl. ii, fig. A 4.1 (1 (\male})).</p>

<p><i>Iliades polymnestor,</i> Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a,</i> p. 144; Hampson, 1889, p. 364; Fergusson, 1891, p. 446; Moore, 1902, p. 203, pl. 452, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> (larva, pupa, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The band of the fore wing usually narrower than in the Ceylon form. {\female} more blue than the Ceylon {\female}.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;Harpe (fig. 30) resembles that of  <i>P. mayo,</i> anteriorly narrower and of more even width, forming a long blade with a continuous even outline which follows the curve of the ventral margin of valve and lens considerably inward; dorsal edge of the anterior broad part furnished with several minute teeth on the posterior half.</p>

<p><i>Larva and Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``We noticed this butterfly at Matheran in the month of March laying its eggs on a lime-tree in the garden. In Karwar we reared a great many in September and October on a common wild orange (<i>Atalantia</i> sp. ?). Another favourite food appears to be <i>Garcinia xanthochymus.</i> In form, colour, and markings the larva is very similar to that of the last two (<i>P. demoleus</i> and <i>P. polytes</i>), but the enlargement of the 4th and 5th segments is much exaggerated, especially after the last moult. In the pupa the head-case and its two projecting points are more elongated'' (<i>Davidson &amp; Aitken,</i> 1890, p. 366).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Peninsular India</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Bengal,</span> Calcutta; not rare. Ascends to 7,000 feet in the Nilgiris.</p>

<p>26 <i>b</i>, <b>Papilio polymnestor parinda</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Iliades parinda,</i> Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 148, pl. 60, fig. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}), 1 <i>b</i> (larva), 1 <i>c</i> (pupa); id., 1902 <i>a</i>, p. 205, pl. 450, figs. 1 (larva), 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}), 1 <i>b</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polymnestor parinda,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 330; Bingham, 1907, pp. 50&#x2013;1; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 70, t. 26 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48.</p>

<p>{\male}. Not constantly different from the nominotypical form, the blue band on the fore wing broader, and the blue area on the hind wing of greater extent.</p>

<p>{\female}. The band of the fore wing and the light area of hind wing yellowish, much less blue than in the {\male}. On the underside both the band on the fore wing and the outer area on the hind wing are generally ochraceous-yellow, without a touch of blue; the former much broader than in the typical form.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;150 mm.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``Smooth, glossy green, with a whitish lower lateral band from 6th to anal segment, a broad, similar coloured band obliquely ascending the 8th and 9th, and a similar band on the 10th segment; anterior shield edged with white, its posterior dorsal end bordered by a transverse blackish-marked crest, a similar crest also across the 4th segment, ending on each side in a large ocellated spot. Feeds on <i>Citrus decumana</i> Murr.'' (<i>Moore</i>).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Green or olive-brown'' (<i>Moore</i>).</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Recorded by Williams (1927, p. 19) as having taken part in a migratory flight.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Ceylon</span>; not rare.</p>

<p><b>Papilio memnon</b> Linn{\ae}us. (Fig. 31 <i>a&#x2013;c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>An extremely variable species, less so in the {\male} than in the {\female}, which is polymorphic and exhibits a great variety of pattern; no less than nine forms can be recognized in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of wings black, with greenish or bluish sheen, with light bluish vein-stripes on the fore wing. Hind wing with indistinct grey-blue stripes and no tail.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of wings with a large dull red basal spot, which on the hind wing is divided by the veins and may be also present on the fore wing above. Hind wing with two rows of black distal patches, margined by grey, grey-blue, yellowish, or yellowish-red scaling, sometimes only the submarginal black patches, or some of them, distinct. Palpi with three small white spots.</p>

<p>{\female}. The various forms can be divided into those without a tail and those which are tailed. The former are more like the {\male}, the fore wing paler, the hind wing above dark, often with blue stripes as in the {\male}, and with black distal patches below, or it may have white discal patches.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>The tailed forms have on the hind wing a white cell-spot and post-cellular white patches which are yellow or red distally.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;``Harpe (fig. 31 <i>a, b</i>) a long curved stout arm, placed along the ventral side of the valve; its anterior part broad, shaped like a knife-blade, with its free end minutely serrate'' (<i>Gosse,</i> 1883, p. 294, pl. xxviii, figs. 1&#x2013;3).</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``The young larva brown, anteriorly on the thorax and on each of the last two abdominal segments with a pair of light spines, which disappear later. When full grown dark velvety green, here and there bluish, the thorax swollen, with spectacle-marking and black transverse band before which a whitish-green band is placed; at the sides of the abdomen two whitish-green oblique bands, of which the first is dorsally united with the band of the other side, the tip of the abdomen, and a longitudinal stripe above the legs greenish-white. The scent-fork in the young larva black, afterwards red'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Green or brown, above between the wing-cases yellow; horns on the head strongly projecting, the wing-cases broad, the first three abdominal segments above them rough, the third segment triangularly widened dorsally'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The larva feeds on <i>Citrus.</i> The {\male} visits flowers and does not frequent moist places on the roads; its flight is swift and restless, whilst the sluggish {\male} sails more slowly.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;South Japan to <span class="smallcaps">Northern India,</span> Borneo, and the small Sunda Islands.</p>

<p>In the Indian area it ranges from Sikkim to Burma and the Nicobar Islands, and is replaced in Southern India and Ceylon by <i>P. polymnestor.</i></p>

<p>Only one subspecies is found in the Indian area; this is usually common.</p>

<p>27. <b>Papilio memnon agenor</b> Linn{\ae}us. (Figs. 32, 33, 34, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agenor,</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 460; Clerck, 1759, t. 15, figs. 1, 2; Distant, 1885, p. 339, pl. 29, fig. 1 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Iliades agenor,</i> Swinhoe, 1893, p. 312; Moore, 1902, p. 194, pls. 446&#x2013;9.</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 316; Bingham, 1907, pp. 46, 47, fig. 9 ({\female}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 72, t. 30 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48.</p>

<p><i>Papilio androgeos,</i> Cramer, 1776, p. 142, pl. 91, figs. A, B ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio androgeus,</i> de Nic\'eville, 1881, p. 53; Elwes, 1888, p. 428; de Nic\'eville, 1890, p. 387; Watson, 1891 <i>a</i>, p. 53.</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcanor,</i> Cramer, 1777, p. 107, pl. 166, figs. A, B.</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor</i> {\female} f. <i>alcanor,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 320; Bingham, 1907, p. 49; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 72; Evans, 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 48, pl. ii,  fig. A 4.2.</p>

<p><i>Iliades mestor,</i> H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 89 (nom. nov.); Distant, 1885, p. 341, pl. 28, fig. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio ph{\oe}nix,</i> Distant, 1885, p. 340, pl. 27 <i>b</i>, fig. 7.</p>

<p><i>Papioio memnon agenor</i> {\female} f. <i>ph{\oe}nix,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 32 Jordan, 1909, <i>a,</i> p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Papilio androgeos depelchini,</i> Robbe, 1892, p. 125.</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor</i> ab. <i>depelchini,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 319; Bingham, 1907, p. 48; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 72.</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor</i> {\male} ab. <i>primigenius,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 319; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 72, t. 27 <i>a</i>; Bingham, 1907, p. 48.</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor</i> {\female} f. <i>butlerianus,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 320 (nom. nov.); Bingham, 1907, p. 49; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 72, t. 29 <i>b</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48.</p>

<p><i>Iliades polymnestoroides,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 202, pl. 451, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polymnestoroides,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 52.</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor</i> ab. <i>polymnestoroides,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 72, t. 48 <i>b</i> (<i>non</i> 32 <i>c</i>).</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon agenor</i> {\female} f. <i>rhetenorina,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 72 (N. India).</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon</i> {\female} f. <i>ph{\oe}niciana,</i> Strand, 1916, p. 25, t. 13, fig. 8 (Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Papilio memnon</i> {\female} f. <i>aphrodite</i>, R\dd{o}ber, 1927 p. 97 (Naga Hills, 6,000&#x2014;7,000 feet).</p>

<p><i>Key to {\male} Forms.</i></p>

<p>1. Upperside of both wings with broad grey-blue stripes... ... ...</p>

<p><i>agenor</i> Linn., p. 130.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing above with heavy pale blue scaling, resembling <i>polymnestor</i>... ... ...</p>

<p>[p. 132. <i>primigenius</i> Roths.,</p>

<p>3. Fore wing above with short blue stripes... ...</p>

<p><i>polymnestoroides</i> [Moore, p. 131,</p>

<p>4. Hind wing above greenish, with scarcely any pale blue scaling... ... ...</p>

<p><i>depelchini</i> Robbe, [p. 131.</p>

<p><i>Key to {\female} Forms.</i></p>

<p>1. Hind wing tailed......</p>

<p><i>alcanor</i> Crm., p. 133.</p>

<p>Hind wing not tailed......</p>

<p>2.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing without white patches......</p>

<p>3.</p>

<p>Hind wing with white patches......</p>

<p>6.</p>

<p>3. Fore wing above sepia, no white area posteriorly......</p>

<p>4.</p>

<p>Fore wing above sepia, a white area on the inner margin......</p>

<p>[p. 132. <i>butlerianus</i> Roths.,</p>

<p>4. Hind wing with a large blue discal area......</p>

<p><i>polymnestoroides</i></p>

<p>Hind wing with or without blue scaling.....</p>

<p>5. [Moore, p. 131.</p>

<p>5. Hind wing above with slight blue scaling, below with a white inner marginal stripe.....</p>

<p>[p. 132. <i>rhetenorina</i> Jord.,</p>

<p>Hind wing above without blue scaling, and only slight traces of black patches.....</p>

<p>[p. 131. <i>depelchini</i> Robbe,</p>

<p>6. Abdomen mostly yellow......</p>

<p><i>aphrodite</i> R\dd{o}ber, p. 133.</p>

<p>Abdomen not yellow.....</p>

<p>7.</p>

<p>7. Hind wing with a large white patch in areas 1 to 3......</p>

<p>[p. 132. <i>ph{\oe}niciana</i> Stnd.,</p>

<p>Hind wing with a more extensive white area.</p>

<p>8.</p>

<p>8. Hind wing with 4 or 5 patches, the posterior ones often broadly red......</p>

<p><i>phoenix</i> Dist., p. 132.</p>

<p>Hind wing with 5 to 7 patches, white or yellowish, and no black discal spots...</p>

<p><i>agenor</i> Linn., p. 131.</p>

<p>Form <b>agenor</b> Linn.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> deep indigo-blue-black; fore wing with or without a short dark red streak at the base; both wings with more or less well-marked silvery-blue adnervular streaks that do not reach the outer margin; these are most prominent on the hind wing, where they extend into the apex of the cell; on the fore wing they are confined to the outer half and become obsolescent towards the costa.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with dull black ground-colour; the adnervular silvery-blue streaks as on the upperside, but much broader, more prominent, and extended well into the cell; a broad dark red patch at base of the latter. Hind wing dull opaque black with broad blacker streaks between the veins, each broadened towards the apex, but not extended to the outer margin; in areas 1 to 4 the apical portion of these streaks is separate and forms a large oval spot : base of wing and tornal area red, on the former traversed by the black veins, on the latter very variable in extent, more or less formed into rings round the submarginal black spots in areas 1 and 2, sometimes in 3 also; finally, a post-discal shading of blue scales more or less lunular in each area. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; the abdomen brownish beneath.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with sepia ground-colour more or less striped with grey-white. Cell with the basal third red, touched outwardly with white, a speck of red at the base of area 2, and the basal third of areas 1 and 2 velvety black. Hind wing black, with five to seven white or yellowish discal patches; in examples with very large patches the posterior ones are prolonged basad. No black discal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;150 mm.</p>

<p>Form <b>depelchini</b> Robbe.&#x2014;Both sexes with more strongly dentate hind wing and with scarcely any blue scaling on the upperside of both wings; hind wing with a greenish gloss. {\female} with an open red anal ring and very slight traces of black patches. Occurs in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim.</span></p>

<p>Form <b>polymnestoroides</b> Moore.&#x2014;{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with short blue stripes; on the hind wing the stripes are heavier, linear, and do not reach the distal margin nor enter the cell.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing sepia, with distal pale grey vein-streaks; base of cell red. Hind wing dull velvety brown, with discal, submarginal, and marginal rows of black spots as in <i>polymnestor,</i> only more obscure; discal area largely blue, extending from the subcostal to the inner margin, and distally produced into streaks. Known from <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Bengal</span>, Calcutta.</p>

<p>{\male} form <b>primigenius</b> Roths.&#x2014;Hind wing above with the black submarginal spots heavily margined with white-blue, and the blue vein-streaks much paler and more condensed than in the {\male} of <i>agenor</i>. Occurs in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Assam.</span></p>

<p>{\female} form <b>ph{\oe}nix</b> Dist.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> with sepia ground-colour. Hind wing with four or five distal patches which are often, especially the posterior ones, broadly red; the posterior spot is frequently prolonged basad. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing often with black discal patches, rarely a white spot in the cell. Occurs in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span></p>

<p>{\female} form <b>ph{\oe}niciana</b> Strand.&#x2014;Very close to <i>ph{\oe}nix.</i> Hind wing bears a large distal white patch covering areas 1 to 3 from the cell to near the outer margin.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>rhetenorina</b> Jord.&#x2014;Both wings dark sepia; fore wing with darker stripes between the veins. Hind wing above with slight blue scaling and often a red anal ring which is sometimes replaced by a spot without a black centre; usually a broad white stripe along the inner margin below. Occurs in <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim.</span></p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>butlerianus</b> Roths.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> of both wings dark sepia. Fore wing with a white posterior area. Hind wing strongly scaled with blue. <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span></p>

<p>{\female} form <b>aphrodite</b> R\dd{o}ber.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> of hind wing anteriorly to vein 6 and including the cell black, the remainder white tinged with yellow; a white spot in the end of the cell and a white streak before vein 6; four large marginal black spots and a small rounded black and spot <i>Underside</i> with the white markings reduced. Abdomen yellow with a lateral white line, the basal part ringed with black. Apparently known only from one specimen taken in the <span class="smallcaps">Naga Hills.</span></p>

<p>{\female} form <b>aleanor</b> Cram.&#x2014;<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing brown or greyish-brown, with black veins and internervular black streaks. Cell red at the base; a velvety black patch at bases of areas 1 and 2. Hind wing black, apical third to apical half of cell and broad streaks at bases of areas 1 to 6 white, the latter tinged with red distally and very variable in length, sometimes one or more absent; a row of red marginal spots that decrease in size from areas 1 to 7; the red in 1 lengthened, occupying half the area, but it is generally interrupted by a large submarginal black spot; cilia black, white between the veins. Abdomen brownish-black, bright ochraceous at the sides. <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span></p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkum</span> to <span class="smallcaps">South Burma</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">South Nicobar Islands.</span> Stragglers are sometimes caught in the Andaman Islands and on Car Nicobar. The species ascends to 7,000 feet in the Himalayas. In Tavoy it is not common, and keeps to densely wooded country at the foot of the hills.</p>

<p>28. <b>Papilio mayo</b> Atkinson. (Fig. 35, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio mayo,</i> Atkinson, 1873 <i>b</i>, p. 736, pl. 63, fig. 1 ({\male}) (Andamans); Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1880, p. 237; id., 1881, p. 252; Rothschild, 1895, p. 332; Bingham, 1907, pp. 49&#x2013;50; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 71, t. 25 <i>b</i>' Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48.</p>

<p><i>Iliades mayo,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 201, pl. 450, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio charicles,</i> Hewitson, 1874, p. 356 ({\female}); id., 1875, <i>Pap.,</i> pl. 14, fig. 45 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio mayo</i> {\male} ab. <i>decurio,</i> Niepelt, 1917, p. 104.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> rich velvety black. Fore wing with a sub-terminal series of greenish-yellow, irrorated, internervular streaks, sometimes more or less obsolescent. Hind wing with a very broad discal pale blue band, composed of broad, outwardly more or less emarginate, streaks in areas 1 to 7; cilia of fore wing black, of hind wing white alternated with black at the veins.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> opaque blue-black. Fore wing with a dark red basal streak, and with submarginal internervular streaks as above, but grey and more prominent. Hind wing with small red basal patches, a complete dark red ocellus in areas 1 and 2, and indistinct submarginal, very variable markings of red in the other interspaces, sometimes formed into half ocelli in interspaces 3 and 4; within this line of markings there is an incomplete discal lunular series of mixed red and blue scaling. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black.</p>

<p>{\female}. This resembles <i>P. memnon agenor</i> {\female} f. <i>alcanor</i> Cram., and is also a mimic of <i>Polydorus rhodifer</i> Butl., occurring with it.</p>

<p>Fore wing with the broad pale internervular streaks nearly white in the discal area. Hind wing with the distal white streaks shorter and strongly tinged with red along their edges, while the dark red is more extended than in <i>alcanor,</i> especially in the tornal area, where it covers the terminal three-fourths of areas 1 and 2, interrupted in 1 by a comparatively round oval black spot and in 2 by a broad elongate black patch; apical half of tail vermilion-red, whitish at apex.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;150 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;An aberrational form of the {\male} is thus described by Mr. De Rh\'e-Philipe in the Journ. Bomb. Nat. Hist. Soc. xx, p. 766 :&#x2014;``The internervular streaks on the fore wing above and the red basal patch on the fore wing below are completely absent, the red basal patch on the hind wing below much reduced. Hind wing below with no red subterminal ocelli in areas 1 and 2 and no red discal scaling. A discal row of blue lunate markings on a deep blue-black ground, extending in a curve from costa to inner margin.'' Three specimens were received.</p>

<p>Another form of {\male} has been named <b>decurio</b> Niep. In this the discal band of hind wing below is almost obsolete, and there are no other markings but the tornal ocellus.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Andaman Islands.</span> The {\female} is rare, but the {\male} is fairly common. It is usually difficult to obtain specimens of the {\female} which are not mutilated.</p>

<p><b>Papilio bootes</b> Westwood. (Fig. 36).</p>

<p>This species is distinguished by having the head and a lateral stripe on the abdomen coloured red. Hind wing elongate with a spatulate tail. Underside with a red band which covers the base of both wings. The sexes are similar, and strongly resemble <i>Polydorus latreillei</i> (Don).</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Sikkim, Assam,</span> and Western China. Five subspecies are known, three occurring in the Indian area.</p>

<p>29 <i>a</i> <b>Papilio bootes janaka</b> Moore (Fig. 36 <i>b</i>, imago).</p>

<p><p>Papilio janaka,</p> Moore, 1857 <i>a</i>, p. 97; Elwes, 1888, p. 426; Rothschild, 1895, p. 336; Bingham, 1907, p. 57, fig. 12 <i>b</i> ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 76&#x2013;7; Seitz, 1907, p. 9; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361.</p>

<p><i>Byasa janaka,</i> Moore, 1902, p. 169, pl. 433, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio bootes janaka,</i> Evans, 1927, p. 30; id., 1932 <i>a,</i> p. 48.</p>

<p><i>Papilio sikkimensis,</i> Wood-Mason, 1882, p. 103.</p>

<p><i>Papilio kala,</i> Tytler, 1915 <i>a</i>, p. 515, {\male} (Western Garhwal).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with greyish-black ground-colour. Hind wing darker in the distal half, and with white discal area, larger in the {\female}, formed of post-cellular patches in areas 2 to 4 and sometimes in 5; one to four submarginal red lunules, and one at the anal angle, which coalesces with the red marginal spot, also marginal red spot in areas 2 to 4; tail with a pale red double spot.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the basal red band extending along the abdominal margin of the hind wing. Fore wing more strongly grey, with usually deep black stripes. Hind wing similar to the upperside, but the discal patches are often much irrorated with red scales.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Garhwal</span> to the <span class="smallcaps">Abor Country</span>; rare. A spring butterfly, ranging from 3,000 to 6,000 feet in Sikkim.</p>

<p>29 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio bootes bootes</b> Westwood. (Fig. 36 <i>a</i>, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio bootes,</i> Westwood, 1842 <i>a</i>, p. 36; id., 1843, p. 123, pl. 31; Binghum, 1907, p. 56, fig. 12 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bootes bootes,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 335; Seitz, 1907, p. 9; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 77; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48, pl. iii, fig. A 4.4 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Byasa bootes</i>, Swinhoe, 1893, p. 312; Moore, 1902, p. 168, pl. 432, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio echo,</i> Ehrmann, 1909, p. 85.</p>

<p>{\male}. Very similar to the following race, but the red basal band on the underside is not continued along the inner margin. Hind wing with only two white post-cellular spots, in areas 2 and 3, elongate and somewhat oval; no submarginal red lunules; above the red tornal spot is a minute crescentic mark of the same colour.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing similar to above, but areas 6 and 7 silky black with a slight greenish lustre; submarginal red lunules in areas 2 and 3.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour brownish-black; fore wing with the internervular streaks broader and more prominent, a small red basal spot. Hind wing with an additional white spot in area 2 and submarginal lunate markings in areas 1 to 4, those in 1 and 4 red, in 3 white tinged with red, and in 4 pure white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> resembles the {\male}, the red at base of wings more extended, the white discal spot in area 2 very small, irrorated with red scales; the submarginal and marginal spots larger, with a white submarginal lunule in area 4.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Assam</span> : Khasi and Jainta Hills, Sylhet; rare.</p>

<p>29 <i>c</i>. <b>Papilio bootes mixta</b> Tytler.</p>

<p><i>Papilio mixta,</i> Tytler, 1915 <i>a,</i> p. 514 ({\male}, Naga Hills; {\female}, Manipur).</p>

<p><i>Papilio bootes mixta,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48.</p>

<p><i>Papilio janaka</i> var. <i>pseudobootes,</i> Niepelt, 1918, p. 3, t. 18, fig. 11, {\male}.</p>

<p>{\male}. Resembles <i>janaka</i> in having four white discal spots on the hind wing and a conspicuous red tornal spot. Resembles <i>bootes</i> in lacking the submarginal red lunules in areas 3 to 5 on the hind wing above, and below by the basal red area not continued along the inner margin.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but has larger white discal spots as well as additional red lunules in areas 3 and 4.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Manipur</span> and the <span class="smallcaps">Naga Hills; North Burma;</span> rare. A similar form occurs in Tong-king. The type of <i>pseudobootes</i> is in the British Museum. It is without locality and cannot be separated from specimens of <i>mixta.</i></p>

<p><b>Papilio rhetenor</b> Westwood.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Body and wings bluish-black, the abdomen laterally somewhat paler. Hind wing elongate, with strongly undulate distal margin. Underside of hind wing with a broad dull red stripe extending from base of costa along the inner margin, and a characteristic dull black discal spot which corresponds to the white patch of the {\female}. The {\female} resembles <i>Polydorus dasarada</i> and <i>philoxenus</i> from the same localities. The hind wing has a broad rounded tail and a white discal area.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;West and Central China and Hainan, and from <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span> to <span class="smallcaps">South Burma.</span> Three subspecies are known, of which only the typical one occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>30 <i>a</i>. <b>Papilio rhetenor rhetenor</b> Westwood. (Fig. 37 <i>a</i>, imago; <i>b&#x2013;d,</i> genitalia).</p>

<p>30 <i>a.</i> <b>Papilio rhetenor rhetenor</b> Westwood. (Fig. 37 <i>a</i>, imago; <b>b&#x2013;d</b>, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhetenor,</i> Westwood, 1841, p. 59, pl. 16, fig. 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}); Gosse, 1883, p. 297, pl. xxviii, figs. 14&#x2013;16 (genitalia); Elwes, 1888, p. 428; Manders, 1890, p. 535; Rothschild, 1895, p. 333; Bigham, 1907, p. 54, fig. 11, pl. xii, fig. 86 ({\female}); Seitz, 1907, p. 10; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 361; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48, pl. iii, fig. A 4.6 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Panosmiopsis rhetenor,</i> Wood-Mason &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p. 374; Moore, 1902, p. 191, pl. 445, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhetenor rhetenor,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 76, t. 29 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio icarius,</i> Westwood, 1848, p. 5, pl. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcmenor</i> C. &amp; R. Felder, 1864 <i>a</i>, p. 324; id., 1864 <i>b</i>, p. 129, t. 20, fig. <i>d</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhetenor turificator,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>b</i>, p. 175 (Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhetenor</i> f. <i>albolunata,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>b</i>, p. 175.</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhetenor</i> {\female} f. <i>leucocelis,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 75; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 48.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a series of pale adnervular streaks not extended to the base nor quite to the margin, but reaching well into the apical half of the cell, and a short slender streak of red, rarely absent, at the extreme base of the subcostal vein. Hind wing with distal bluish scaling; an irregular incomplete white ring at the tornal angle that encloses a black spot bordered above by red.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing more strongly grey; a basal dark red patch traversed by the black veins. Hind wing deep indigo-blue-black; the basal red band bears two black spots in area 1, and also some irregular white scaling in the same area; in area 2 the band bears three large black spots, in some specimens the two inner ones coalescent; a diffuse distal spot of blue scaling in areas 6 and 7.</p>

<p>{\female}. Ground-colour duller black. Fore wing with the adnervular streaks broader, paler, and more prominent than in the {\male}; the short red basal streak broader. Hind wing discal patch consisting of an elongate spot at base of area 4 and a short streak that fills the basal half of area 5, extended diffusely into apex of cell and above into area 6; beyond this white patch is a discal series of three small red crescentic marks in areas 2, 4, and 5 or in 2 and 4 only, followed by larger red lunules in areas 2 to 5, marginal large red spots in 2 and 3, and a more or less large rectangular red spot centred with black at the tornal angle; cilia touched with white between the veins. The lunular red markings are very variable in number and are marginal in areas 4 to 6.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing dull olivaceous-black, with the veins and internervular streaks velvety black, a red patch at base of cell. Hind wing similar to above, but with more extensive white and red markings, the latter so disposed as to form a patch at base and a broad inner border; in areas 1, 2, and 3 it is interrupted by large black spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;``Harpe (fig. 37, <i>b, c</i>) a long tubular rod terminating in an oblique hatchet-shaped head, of almost oval outline, facing the dorsal side, and set with strong bristles below; its broad anterior edge is very minutely toothed'' (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883).</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;Specimens of the {\male} with a white posterior patch on the fore wing are called <b>leucocelis</b> Jord. Specimens from the Karen Hills are sometimes intermediate between the typical form and <i>publilius</i> Fruh.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Lower Burma</span> (Karen Hills); not rare; ascends to about 6,000 feet in the Himalayas. Described originally from Assam.</p>

<p>30 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio rhetenor publilius</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Papilio rhetenor publilius,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>b</i>, p. 175 ({\male}, Lower Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a well-marked greyish-white patch on the inner margin. Hing wing with the anal spots in area 2 enlarged and white, also usually a large marginal spot in area 3 and one in 4, and a small white or reddish submarginal spot in 3.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the white patch more distinct than in the other races. Hind wing with usually a small red submarginal spot in area 4.</p>

<p>{\female}. Scarcely differs from typical ones; hind wing below with less extended basal red.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Lower Burma</span>, Karen Hills, and Dawnas Range; and south-east to Siam.</p>

<p><i>Protenor</i> Group.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Alike. Fore wing somewhat elongate; costa arched, apex produced but rounded; outer margin oblique, slightly concave; tornus rounded; inner margin straight, about half length of costa; cell broad and long, more than half length of wing. Hind wing with the costa and outer margin to end of vein 2 forming one long continuous curve, the outer margin broadly scalloped; inner margin to tornal angle straight, below the latter the termen emarginate; cell narrow, comparatively short; subcostal vein and upper discocellular subequal {\male} with a white costal streak on upperside of hind wing. Antenn{\ae} not half length of fore wing, slender; club elongate, gradual, slight.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Japan to Formosa and China, <span class="smallcaps">Northern India</span> and <span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>. Only one of the three species composing this group occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Papilio protenor</b> Cramer.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Hind wing above with a broad white subcostal stripe, and below with a large red tornal patch and submarginal lunuls formed into rings with the marginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``Green, a spectacle-band on the thorax, a black-edged band on the 4th segment, two oblique bands on the abdomen, and the anal segment brown mixed with white; the prolegs grey; on <i>Zanthophyllum</i>'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;Either uniformly green or coloured like rough bark.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Often seen in swarms on moist sand at the banks of rivers; also visits flowers, being especially fond of thistles. Has a slow and somewhat tumbling flight.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;Formosa, Hainan, and China to Tong-king, <span class="smallcaps">Burma,</span> and <span class="smallcaps">India.</span> Three subspecies, two in the Indian area.</p>

<p>31 <i>a</i>. <b>Papilio protenor protenor</b> Cramer. (Fig. 38 <i>a</i>, imago; <i>b, c,</i> genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio protenor,</i> Cramer, 1775, p. 77, pl. 49, figs. A, B ({\male}); Gosse, 1883, p. 229, pl. xxviii, figs. 25, 26 (genitalia); Staudinger &amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 9, t. 5 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 331; Bingham, 1907, p. 53, fig. 10.</p>

<p><i>Sainia protenor,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 260; Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 137; Moore, 1903, p. 188, pl. 444, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>&#x2013;1 <i>d</i> (larva, pupa, {\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio protenor protenor,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 75, 76; Seitz, 1907, p. 10, t. 36; Hannyngton, 1921, p. 361; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> velvety indigo-blue-black, duller on the fore wing than on the hind wing. Fore wing with pale adnervular streaks broadened along the outer margin and extended well into the cell. Hind wing with a broad pale yellowish-white subcostal stripe; areas 5 and 6 irrorated with bluish scales; tornal angle marked with red.</p>

<p>Figure</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing dull black; adnervular grey streaks, which are broader than above. Hind wing ground-colour as above; a large irregularly-shaped red patch at the tornal angle that extends into area 2, and submarginal red lunules in areas 2, 6, and 7; cell irrorated more or less with a sprinkling of blue scales; the tornal patch with a black, outwardly blue-edged, round medial spot, and areas 4 and 5 with a submarginal irroration of blue scales. Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen dark brownish-black.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}; ground-colour paler. Fore wing with yellowish adnervular streaks. Hind wing without a white subcostal stripe, distal blue scaling more dense; red patch at tornal angle large, with an oval medial black spot; a submarginal black spot in 2, posteriorly bordered by a crescent-shaped red mark.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> resembles the {\male}. Fore wing vein-streaks broader and paler. Hind wing tornal patch paler and larger, extended broadly anteriorly and distally into area 2, where it coalesces with a broad submarginal black-centred red ocellus; the irroration of blue scales in area 5 with a small submarginal red lunule below it.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 100&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia.</i>&#x2014;``Harpe (fig. 38 <i>c</i>) a twisted broad blade which terminates anteriorly in a free point, the terminal half of the upper edge serrated as far as the tip with numerous tall, closely-set, curved teeth'' (<i>Gosse,</i> 1883).</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Kashmir</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; not rare.</p>

<p>31 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio protenor euprotenor</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Papilio protenor euprotenor,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1908, <i>c</i>, p. 46 (Sikkim); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 76; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49, pl. iii, fig. A 4.6 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. Not sharply distinguished from <i>P. p. protenor.</i> Fore wing below whiter. Hind wing above with more extensive blue scaling in the distal area.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">North Burma,</span> extending to Tong-king; not rare.</p>

<p><i>Paris</i> Group.</p>

<p>The species of this group have been called the Gloss-Papilios on account of the glossy blue or green scaling of the upperside. This metallic scaling is either uniformly distributed over the whole upper surface or forms a large metallic patch or band. The underside is always dark. In some species the male has woolly scent-streaks on the veins in the distal area of the fore wing. The hind wing is tailed in most species and the outer margin is usually more or less scalloped.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;The group has a wide range from North Japan over the whole Indo-Australian Region to the Pacific islands.</p>

<p>32. <b>Papilio elephenor</b> Doubleday.</p>

<p><i>Papilio elephenor,</i> Doubleday, 1845, p. 305; Doherty, 1889, p. 130; Rothschild, 1895, p. 378; Bingham, 1907, p. 80; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 77, t. 34 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pangeranopsis elephenor</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 59, pl. 489, fig. 2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio elephenor elephenor,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with an irroration of brilliant green scales that form cellular and internervular streaks; {\male} with woolly scent-streaks in the posterior distal area. Hind wing not tailed, elongate; anterior half to nearly the median vein and above vein 5 irrorated with brilliant blue scales that become gradually sparse towards and cease entirely along the costal margin; posterior half irrorated with brilliant green scales; tornus with a small claret-red patch, touched above with a few violet scales and also with a marginal dusky black spot. Cilia brown alternated with white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> black. Fore wing with very broad and prominent cellular and internervular pale streaks, the costal margin and the basal half of areas 1 <i>a</i> and 1 distinctly black. Hind wing with a series of claret-red submarginal lunules, two side by side in each area, all more or less irrorated outwardly with violet scales; at the tornal angle these lunules form a conspicuous oblong patch that stretches a short way along the inner margin and bears a subdorsal and a subapical black spot. Head pinkish-red; antenn{\ae}, thorax, and abdomen narrowly along the middle black; abdomen yellow-grey at the sides.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;The hills of <span class="smallcaps">Assam</span>; very rare, especially the {\female}.</p>

<p><b>Papilio dialis</b> Leech.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of wings dusted with green. Hind wing with a blue tinge in the costal area, but without a metallic patch, and at the anal angle a red ring. Fore wing with narrow and widely separated scent-streaks.</p>

<p>{\female}. The metallic scaling is less dense, and on the hind wing is a submarginal red spot below vein 2.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;Observed by Fruhstorfer in Tong-king near the native habitations on refuse-heaps as well as on the moist sand of a river bank. Though the butterfly is very shy, yet when driven away it frequently returns to the same place. When feeding it always keeps the wings closed.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Shan States</span> to Central China, Hainan, and Formosa; always rare. Only one subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p>33. <b>Papilio dialis schanus</b> Jordan.</p>

<p><i>Papilio dialis schanus,</i> Jordan, 1919, <i>a</i>, p. 77 (S. Shan States).</p>

<p><i>Papilio elephenor schanus,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Papilio doddsi,</i> Bingham (<i>non</i> Janet), 1907, p. 81, pl. xii, fig. 88 (Upper Burma).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with only slight blue scaling; one to three red submarginal lunules, besides the anal eye-spot, and a very short stumpy tail.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing only blackish to the base of vein 2. Hind wing submarginal spots more yellowish.</p>

<p>Fore wing scent-stripes very narrow, and no stripe on the submedian fold.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}, 120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Southern Shan States</span>; very rare, the {\female} unknown.</p>

<p><b>Papilio bianor</b> Cramer.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing above with broad pilose scent-stripes, the wing dusted with green or greenish-blue. Hind wing anteriorly blue or greenish-blue, and posteriorly dusted with green, with usually a green or blue patch, a red anal spot, submarginal red spots, and some green submarginal spots, at least anteriorly.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the black basal area extended beyond the base of vein 3. Hind wing with a complete row of red submarginal spots.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> with sparser metallic scaling. Hind wing with more prominent red spots.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;Green, with two to three light oblique bands; feeds on Aurantiace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The males congregate on moist sand and visit flowers.</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;North Japan to Western China, Tong-king, and <span class="smallcaps">Burma.</span> Several subspecies are known, often variable in themselves, but only one occurs in the Indian area. Usually common, but becomes rare towards the southern limits of its range.</p>

<p>34. <b>Papilio bianor gladiator</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bianor</i> var. <i>gladiator,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>b</i>, pp. 270, 271 (Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Sarbaria gladiator,</i> Moore, 1903, p. 58, pl. 489, fig. 1.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bianor</i> ab. <i>gladiator,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 78.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bianor gladiator,</i> Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bianor,</i> Bingham, 1907, p. 82.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with scent-stripes on veins 1 to 3, and short green internervular streaks in the discal area. Hind wing with no prominent green patch; posteriorly the basal three-fourths irrorated with green, on the anterior half with blue scales that leave a broad and uniform costal area devoid of the irroration of blue or green scales; a submarginal series of lunules often incomplete, the anterior ones bluish-green, the posterior ones claret-red, traversed by short inner lines of blue; the tornal lunule the widest. Cilia on the hind wing brown alternated with white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing chocolate-brown; the cell with a slight irroration of yellowish scales; distal area with broad pale internervular streaks that increase in length from the tornal area to costa, but do not reach the outer margin. Hind wing deep brownish-black, the base, cell, and disc partially with thin irroration of pale yellow scales; a conspicuous submarginal series of broad claret-red lunules traversed by short lines of violet-blue, and a series of marginal narrow transverse ochraceous spots in the interspaces. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen chocolate-brown; head, thorax, and abdomen above thinly sprinkled with green scales.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles the {\male}, but is larger and paler, the hind wing with more prominent red markings.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 110&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Burma</span>; very rare. Also found in Tong-king. Not always sharply separated from typical Chinese <i>bianor</i> Cram.</p>

<p><b>Papilio polyctor</b> Boisduval.</p>

<p>Closely allied to <i>bianor</i> Cram. The scent-stripes on the fore wing of the male are always separated, and those on veins 2 and 3 are more strongly narrowed at both ends than in <i>bianor</i>. Fore wing above usually with an anteriorly abreviated narrow discal band. Hind wing in both sexes with a large blue or bluish-green patch reaching from the costa to vein 5 at least, and usually prolonged into a band; besides the anal spot there are three or four red submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the grey distal area always entering the cell.</p>

<p>{\female}. Larger, and much paler on the fore wing than the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Larva.</i>&#x2014;``The young larva bears spines which disappear in the later stages, and is very dark. In the half-grown and full-grown larv{\ae}, which are green, the thorax is thickened above like a shield; the margins of the shield and also four oblique stripes on the abdomen are yellowish-grey, a longitudinal line above the prolegs is white. On <i>Xanthoxylon alatum</i>'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Pupa.</i>&#x2014;``Bluish-green, usually with brown markings, the lateral keel very distinct, brown or white, the horns on the head almost as long as they are broad at the base, the thoracic horns broad, low, pointed'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p><i>Distribution.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Burma,</span> Tong-king, and Siam; usually common. Three subspecies are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>35 <i>a</i>. <b>Papilio polyctor polyctor</b> Boisduval.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyctor,</i> Boisduval, 1836, p. 205; Blanchard, 1844, p. 14, pl. 1, figs. 1, 2; Staudinger &amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 8, t. 2 (neuration, palpi, tarsus); MacKinnon &amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 594, pl. 2, figs. 24 <i>a&#x2013;c</i> (larva, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Sarbaria polyctor,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 258; Doherty, 1886 <i>a</i>, p. 136; Moore, 1903, p. 51, pl. 485, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> (larva, pupa, {\male}{\female}), pl. 486, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyctor polyctor,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 381; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 79; Bingham, 1907, pp. 82&#x2013;3; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Sarbaria peeroza,</i> Moore, 1882, p. 258.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyctor</i> f. vern. <i>peeroza,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 382; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 79.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The sexes are very nearly alike, and the difference slight between the spring (dry season) and summer (wet season) broods. <i>Upperside</i> dull black thickly irrorated with golden-green scales. Fore wing with a broad submarginal golden-green band that varies in length, but in all specimens is more or less diffuse and obsolescent towards the costal margin; in specimens of the wet-season broods this band is slightly broader than in those of the dry season, also broader in the {\female} than in the {\male}. Hind wing with less dense golden-green irroration, turning to blue on the anterior portions of the wing; a broad bright blue upper discal patch that stops well short of the margin, and has its outer edge uneven, occupying the base of area 4 and the outer portions of areas 5, 6, and 7; posteriorly this patch is continued in areas 1 to 3 by much smaller diffuse quadrate spots of brilliant golden-green scales that are prominent in wet-season forms, more obscure in the dry. The discal patch itself is variable in size; in some specimens there is only a trace of it in area 4. Tornus with a conspicuous submarginal claret-red lunule, traversed inwardly by an obscure blue line and edged above the lunule, narrowly, by velvety black; indications generally of a similar lunule in area 2; a marginal series of large velvety black markings that down the middle of the tail form broad borders to the green irroration. Cilia broadly edged with white in the interspaces.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> chocolate-brown, somewhat thinly irrorated with yellowish scales, which are absent, however, from a more or less triangular patch in the middle of the fore wing posteriorly, but coalesce and form an ill-defined, very short, submarginal band just above the tornal angle. Hind wing with a conspicuous submarginal series of claret-red lunules, each traversed inwardly by a line of purplish-blue, followed by velvety black spots and broad white marginal lunules. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen brownish-black; the head, thorax, and abdomen above thinly irrorated with green scales.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 90&#x2013;120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x2014;The seasonal forms differ as stated above; the dry form is called <b>peeroza</b> Moore, and is usually much smaller.</p>

<p><i>Habits.</i>&#x2014;The males commonly rest in large numbers on the moist sand of river-banks.</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Chitral</span> to <span class="smallcaps">Kumaon</span>; common, and ascending to 6,000 feet.</p>

<p>35 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio polyctor ganesa</b> Doubleday.</p>

<p><i>Papilio ganesa,</i> Doubleday, 1842, p. 73; Staudinger &amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 8, t. 5 ({\male}); Butler, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 344; Elwes, 1888, p. 428.</p>

<p><i>Sarbaria ganesa,</i> Swinhoe, 1893, p. 312; Moore, 1903, p. 56, pl. 487, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyctor ganesa,</i> Rothschild, 1895, p. 383; Bingham, 1907, p. 84; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 79, t. 34 <i>b</i>; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 49.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyctor</i> var. <i>triumphator,</i> Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>d</i>, p. 65; Jordan, 1909 <i>a,</i> p. 79.</p>

<p><i>Sarbaria triumphator,</i> Moore, 1903, p. 57, pl. 488, fig. 1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polyctor ganesa,</i> ab. <i>porphyria,</i> Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 79, t. 48 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio triumphator</i> ab. <i>mai,</i> Tytler, 1912, p. 590.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> ground-colour slightly darker than in the nominotypical form, irroration of green scales not so dense. Fore wing with the submarginal bright golden-green transverse band very incomplete, often merely indicated from near the tornus to not further than area 3. Hind wing discal patch not continued to the inner margin, but more or less strongly produced distad behind the subcostal and vein 6; the red submarginal lunules on the posterior half of the wing more generally present.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> ground-colour darker than in the Western race. Fore wing with very prominent internervular whitish streaks on the outer half; these streaks increase in length towards the costa, but do not reach the outer margin. Hind wing with less dense and more restricted irroration of yellowish scales; submarginal red and marginal white lunules variable in width and prominence, especially the latter ones.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i> : {\male}{\female}, 120&#x2013;130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation.</i>&#x214;A rare aberration occurs in which the hind wing below has very strongly enlarged submarginal spots; this is <b>porphyria</b> Jord.</p>

<p>Several specimens of the cold-weather form, with the hind wing patch brilliant green instead of blue, were taken in the Naga Hills in February and April; this is form <b>mai</b> Tytler</p>

<p><i>Habitat.</i>&#x2014;<span class="smallcaps">Sikkim</span> to <span class="smallcaps">North Burma</span>; common.</p>

<!--178-->

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>

<p></p>




<aside type="footnote" id="fn-01">
  <p><sup>1</sup> Collectively the political district of Tenasserim.</p>
</aside>

<aside type="footnote" id="fn-02">
  <p><sup>2</sup> <span>Sect</span> I. A. : <i>b</i>&#x2014;These three are all black in their first stage, and profusely covered with little branched spines which are gradually lost in the successive stages, finally disappearing in the fourth stage.</p>
</aside>

</body>
</html>
