<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
	<meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=utf-8" />
	<title>Butterflies</title>
	<link href="style.css" media="screen" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
</head>
<body>

<!--pdf page no. 202-334-->

<p>47 <i>a.</i> <b>Papilio chaon chaon</b> Westwood.</p>

<p><i>Papilio chaon</i>, Westwood, 1845, p.97, pl.72, fig. i; Rothschild, 1895, p.292; Bingham, 1907, pp.58-9; Lathy, 1904, p.69. <i>Sadengia chaon</i>, Moore,
1907, p.213, pl.457,figs. 1 a-1 <i>d</i> ({\male}). <i>Papilio chaon chaon</i>, Jordan,1909 a, p.53, t.22 <i>b, c</i>; Evens 1927, p.237, pl. 4 fig.A 4.21({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio chaon</i> {\male} ab. <i>paryphanta</i>, Jordan, 1909 a, p. 53, t.32 b.</p>

<p><i>Papilio chaon</i> {|female} f.leucacantta, Frushstorfer, 1908 d, p.73 (Sikkim); Jordan, 1909 a, p.53.</p>

<p>{\male}.<i>Upperside</i> with black ground-colour. Fore wing with a sprinking of yellowish-brown scales that form four longitudinal streaks in the cell and internerular distal streaks. Hind wing with the white discal area formed of elongate board spots in areas 4 to 7; neither tornal nor subarginal markings.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> ground-colour duller brounish-black. Fore wing with the diffuse scaling so dispersed as to form grey cellular and internervular 
streaks, those in area 1 <i>a</i> and 1 <i>b</i> generally white, not diffuse. Hind wing with the the basal area sprinkled with yellow scales that 
form three longitudinal slender lines in the cell; white discal patch as above, but the spots well divided by the black venis; below the discal patch a
small series of white spots in areas 1 to 3, the spot in 1 generally, in 2 very often, tinged with ochraceous-yellow lunules followed by marginal narrow white spots.</p>

<p>{\femmal}. Paler with larger markings. Fore wing above often with an obscure diffuse whitish subcostal shading just beyond apex of cell. Fore wing below somtimes with a series of more or less conspicuous marginal white spots, Abodomen beneath with lateral white marking.</p>

<p>Expanse: {\male} {\female} , 115-130 mm.</p>

<p>Variation.- There is a rare form of the {\male} in which the yellow submarginal spots of the hind wing are greatly enlarged, the posterior and anterior almost as large as the second white discal spot. This is called <b>PARYPHANTA</b> Jord.</p>

<p>A rare form of {\female}, in which the cell of the fore wing bears a large area of white scaling, is called <b>leucantha</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p>The size of the white patches on the hind wing and of the submarginal spots, as the length of the wings, is very variable.</p>

<p><b><i>Habitat.-</i> NEPAL to NORTHERN BURMA; common</b>.</p>

<p>47 <i>b</i>. <b>PaPilio chaon ducenarius</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Papilio chaon ducenarius, Fruhstorfer</i>, 1908 <i>d</i>,p.73 (Tenasserim); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.51.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}: The white area of the hind wing larger than in the nominotypical from, the fourth patch anteriorly produced into a long which projects beyond the third patch.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.-SOUTHERN BURMA; not rare. According to Ollenbach (1921) the insect in Tavoy prefers the low country and was not seen on the hills.</p>

<p><b>Papilio noblei</b> de Nec\'eville.</p>

<p>A peculiar and very distinct species allied to <i>antonio</i> Hew. from the Philippines, but with quite different genitalia.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing black, rarely with a white spot at the inner margin. Hind wing white discal area reaching vein 5, and this area rather narrow costally. Hind wing below lunular dark ochraceous spots.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-NORTHERN BURMA to the KAREN HILLS and east to Tong-king, The nominotypical form occurs in the Indian area, and a distinct race, as yet unnamed, occurs in central Tong-king. Few specimens of either are to be found in collections. Only the {\female} is known of the Tong-king race; this is the form figured by Jorden in Seitz's Macrolep., ix, 1909, t. 21 b.</p>

<p>48.<b>Papilio noblei</b> de Nice\'eville.</p>

<p><i>Papilio nobali</i>, de Nice\'eville, 1889 <i>a</i>, p.287, pl.13, fig.2({\male}) (Karen Hills); Rothschiled, 1895, p.284; Bingham, 1907, pp.60-1; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.52 (part.); Evans, 1923, p.238; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.51.</p>

<p><i>Sadengia noblei</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 217, pl.459, figs. 2,2a ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio henricus</i>, Oberthur, 1893, p.3, pl. 4, fig.39 ({\male}) (Tong-king).</p>

<p><i>Papilio noblei haynei</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 249 (Myitkyina, N.Burma).</p>

<p>({\male}). <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with four slender lines in the cell and the veins paler than the ground-colour. Hind wing with a dark ocharceous incomplete ring at the tornal angle, enclosing a deep black ovel spot; above this a discal cremy-white patch that consists of a quadrate spot in area 7, an elongate rectangular spot in 6, and a trapezoidal spot in 5.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with duller and brownish-black ground-colour; lines in the cell greyish-white and prominent; a small white discal spot in area 2 followed by a marginal series of short white lines between the veins. Hind wing with the basal third dull brownish-black irroared with greyish scales; discal white patch as above, but slightly larger; below it an elongate mark in area 1, and a submarginal complete series of broad ochraceous-orange lunules; the lower discal area, the tail, and the ground-colour before and behind the upper submarginal lunules velvety black. Antenn{\ae}, head thorax, and abdomen black; beneath, the palpi and thorax marked with greyish-white, the abdonmen more yellowish.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 110 mm.</p>
<p><i>Variation</i>.-Specimens occur in which the fore wing above bears a quadrate white spot in the middle of areas 1<i>a</i> and 1<i>b</i>,with the vein dividing them also white in this area. This is <b>henricus</b> Ob., and is known from Muong-Mou in Tong-king. It is not unlikely that similar specimens will be found in the Indian area. The form represents a transition to the more easterly Tong-king race.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.-The nominotypical form occurs in the district of Myitkyina (pronounced ``Mitchinar'') in NORTHERN BURMA, extending to the Karen Hills and east to the Sawasi River area and western Tong-king. Always very rare.</p>

<p><b>Papilio fuscus</b> Goeze.</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}. The body similar to that of <i>helenus</i>, the palpi laterally entirely white. Fore wing of the {\male} without secnt-stripes. Hind    wing with a white discal band, which is broader above than beneath, and some indistinct spots in the distal area. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing with some  blue discal spots and with yellowish-red submarginal spots. {\female} paler, with larger markings.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i>(from Jordan, 1909a):-</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.-Light green pale yellow, laid singly upon <i>Citrus</i> leaves near their tips on the upper or under surface.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.-At first a dirty green, anteriorly and posteriorly whiteish, with a black V-spot in the middle of the back; at each end of the back a row of small white spines; head glossy black. When full-grown very variable in colour. Usually brown-red mixed with yellow and olive-green, the underside pale greenish or whitish; an oblique band begins posteriorly at the thorax smaller oblique lateral spots also on some other segments, the pronotum and the 11th segment with a pair of tubercles.</p> 

<p><i>Pupa</i>.-Glossy green, beneath in the middle strongly convex, dorsally only feebly incurved, with short thoaracic horn, the wing-cases uniformly projecting. The contour viewed from above forms almost a parallelogram, the head truncate and produced into a point on each side.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-The ANDAMAN ISLANDS to Australia and the Solomen Island, but absent from Sumatra, Java, the small Sunda Islands, and the Philippines. At least eighteen subspecies are known one of which is confined to the Andamans.</p>

<p>The butterflies occur in open forests with undergrowth, and usually common.</p>  

<p><b>Paplilo fuscus andamanicus</b> Rothschild.</p>

<p><i>papilio fuscus andamanicus.</i>Rothschild, 1908, p.171 (Andamans); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 56; t.22 b, Evans, 1923, p.238; id., 1927, p.32; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.52.</p>

<p><i>Papilio prexaspes</i>, Rothschild (<i>non</i> Felder) (part.), 1895, p.297; Wood-Mason & de Nice\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p.254.</p>

<p><i>Sadengia prexaspes</i>, Moore (non Felder), 1902, p.215, pl.458, figs.1, 1 a-1 c({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio fuscus prexaspes</i>, 1907, p.59.</p>

<p>{\male}.Smaller than <i>P</i>.chaon which it resembles, the fore wing more produced, with incurved outer margin. <i>Upperside</i> with brownish  sooty-black ground-colour. Hind wing with the discal white patch extended into area 4, most usually very slightly so, often represented only by a very small  spot of white scaling, a white spot also above the tornal angle.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the internervular brownish-yellow streaks limited to the apical area. Hind wing with discal patch extended to the inner margin in a series of three series of lunules formed of diffuse blue scales, and the sub-margins series of dark ochraceous lunules smaller and darker than in chaon.</p>

<p>{\female}.Fore wing an ill-defined board pale discal band perceptibly widended and becoming whitish opposite apex of cell. Hind wing with the discal extension into area 4 more pronouncd than in the {\male}, and the small white spot above the tornal angle sometimes followed by a blue ill-defined lunule and an ochraceous spot.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with white discal band  which is much more prominent than above. Hind wing with the  post-discal series of blue lunules generally complete and well marked.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male}{\female}, 105-115 mm.</p> 

<p><i>Habibit</i>.-ANDAMAN ISLANDS; rare. Not known elsewhere within the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Papilio hipponous</b> Felder.</p>

<p>Resembles <i>P. polytes</i>Linn. Fore wing with a narrow yellowish submarginal band, only represented in the Indian race by a small spot near the inner margin. {\female} paler than the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.-The males may be taken drinking at puddles and springs.</p>

<p><i>Disribution</i>.-LOWER BURMA to Silm, the Philippines, and extending to Sangir and the Talaud Islands. Always rare. A single subspecies occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Papilio hipponous pitmani</b> Elwes {amp; de Nic\'eville.</p> 
	
<p><i>Papilo pitmani</i>, Elwes {amp; de Nic\'eville, 1887, p.434,pl.20,fig. 1({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, p.343; Bingham, 1907, p.63.</p>

<p><i>Sadengia pitmani</i>, Moore, 1902, p.216,pl.459, figs.1,1 <i>a</i>({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio hipponous pitmani</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.59; Evans, 1923, p.237; id., 1927, p.32; id.,1932 <i>a</i>, p.52.</p>

<p><i>Papilio pitmani leptosephus</i>, Fruhstorfer,  1909 <i>b</i>,p.178 (Assam); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.60; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p.52(=<i>pitmani</i>).</p>

<p>{\male}{\female}.<i>Upperside</i> more brownish-black than in <i>P.polytes</i>. Fore wing more thickly irrorated with yellowis scales; an obscure yellowish-brown spot (not always present) in areas 1 <i>a</i>  and <i>b</i> close to the tornal angle; no marginal spots; cilia black, with a few touches of white on the posterior half of the wing. Hind wing discal band with the posterior spot or two brownish-yellow, the band wider in the middle; the tornal ocellus generally obscure and ill defined.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> with duller ground-colour. Fore wing with more prominent yellowish irroration, formed into lines in the cell, and with internervular  broad streaks on the anterior half of the wing; a transverse submarginal series of diffuse white spots that vary from from a single spot in area 1 a to double spots in areas 1 <i>b</i> to 4.  Hind wing with a post-discal band as above, followed by a submarginal series of yellow lunules. Cilia black, irregularly alternated with white. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen dull brownish-black.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male}{\female}, 90-100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.-SOUTHERN BURMA; rare. Also found in Siam. Its occurence in Assam (Fruhstorfer, 1909) is extremely  doubtful.</p>

<p><b>Papilio polytes</b> Linn{\ae}us. (Fig.45 <i>a-c</i>, genitalia; fig.46, {\male}; figs.47,48,{\female}).</p>

<p>A very interesting species of wide distribution whose females mimic species of <i>Polydorus</i>, which occur in the same localities.</p>

<p>{\male}. Palpi white laterally. Ground-colour black. Fore wing with white marginal spots which are broader proximally. Hind wing a white post-discal band which consists of spots of about equal size.</p>

<p>{\female}. There are three principal forms: one resembling the {\male},  one with red discal patches on the hind wing. In the two latter forms the fore   wing is back from the base to veins 2 or 3 and along the outer margin; the posteriorly narrowed central area is lighter and traversed by black vein-and fold-stripes; distal margin distinctly underlate, with thin white frings-spots.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.-Harpe (fig. 45 <i>a, b</i>) resembles that of the <i>Memmon</i> Group; the broad distal end hatchet-shaped, much broader than in <i>helenus</i>, the dorsal edge unevenly serrate (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883, p.301, p1. xxix, figs. 7-9).</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.-``Spherical, hardly perceptibly rough on the surface. Pale orange, opaque, shiny, smudged with pale brown. Diameter 1.2mm.'' (Bell,1911).</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.-``Resembles <i>Polymnestor</i>. Head yellow; crests on segments 4 and 5 yellow; ocellus black. The usual two tubercle son segments 2 and 13. Dorsally a rich glaucous green, slightly yellowish on the side; bands and markings on segments 7 to 10 are white, blotched with red-brown or brown, with venter brownish-white  suffused with red-brown or brown. Length 40mm.; breadth 8mm. at the middle'' (Bell, 1911).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.-``Olive-brown, with brown, green, and yellow spots and stripes, the underside of the abdomen milk-white, or the whole pupa green; the horns on the head short, obtuse, rather widely separeted, the thoraxcic horn short, the dorsum at the base of abdomen rather strongly incurved, the wing- cases moderately protruding''(<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 <i>a</i>).</p>

<p>Fig. 45.- <i>P. polytes</i> Linn., genitalia. (After Gosse).</p>

<p><i>a</i>, valve and harpe;  <i>b</i>, harpe; <i>c</i>, lateral view of genitalia, both valves removed and segments denuded of scales.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.-The larva feeds chiefly on species of <i>Citrus</i>, but also on <i>Murraya, Triphasia, and Xanthoxylon</i>; it is not very subject to the attacks of ichneumons</p>.

<p>The imago  occurs everywhere in open woods and in gardens at low elevations, in the Himalayas up to 6,000 feet. It seldom rises far from the ground, preferring the shelter of bushes, thick places in the jungle, and of hedges. It is fond of visting  flowers, but does not come to wet places on the roads. The flight of the {\male} is very swift, restless, and oscillating. The {\female} in its slow flight resembles its <i>Poludorus</i> models. The different {\female} forms fly at the same time, but are not equally common. They visit flowers, but are best caught when laying their eggs. The species is very easy to breed, but occasionally remains for a long time in the pupal stage.</p>

<p><i>Bionomics</i>.- This species was made the subject of an important series of breeding experiments carried out in Ceylon by J.C.F Fryer. The results  were published in the Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.Lond. B,cciv, 1913, pp.227-54. It was shown that the relationship existing between the three {\female} forms could be explained on ordinary Mendelian lines. In Ceylon this species has reached a position of Mendelian stability.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-The Loo Choo Islands, West China, and INDIA to the Moluccas, Timor, and neighbouring islands, expect Tenimber. At least nineteen subspecies may be distinguished, of which only two occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>51 <i>a</i><b>Papilio polytes romulus</b> Cramer. (Fig. 46,{\male}; figs. 47, 48, {\female}; P1. I, fig. 18<i>a, b, larva, fig.19</i>, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio romulus</i>, Cramer, 1775, p. 67, pl. 43, fig. A; Moore, 1865 <i>b</i>, p. 756; Chaumette, 1865, p.37.</p>

<p><i>Laertias romulus</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p.150,p1. 59, figs. 1({\male}), 1<i>a</i>({\female), 1<i>c</i>(\female) (part).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes romulus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 347; Jordan, 1909<i>a</i>, p. 61, t. 32<i>a</i>; Polulton, 1918,p. 1xxxiv; Evans, 1923, p.238, pl. iv, fig A 25 ({\female}); id.; 1927, p.32 ; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.52, pl.iv. figs. A 4.25 ({\male}{\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio cyrus</i>, Fabricius, 1793, p.7,{\female}.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes </i> {\female} f.<i>cyrus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 344 (part).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes romulus</i> {\female} f.<i>cyrus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.61, t. 31 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1923, p. 238; id., 1927, p. 32; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.52.</p>

<p>=<i>Papilio romulus</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 150, pl. 59, figs.1<i>b</i>, 1<i>c</i> ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Princeps heroicus stichius</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1806-19, <i>t</i>.112.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes {\female} f.stichius</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p.347; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 61; Evans. 1923, 238, pl. iv, fig. A 4.25; id., 1927, p.32; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 52, pl. iv, fig. A 4.25.</p>

<p><i>Papilio sakontala</i>, Hewitson, 1852, p.24, pl. 5, fig. 1; Rothschild, 1895, p. 343; Mackinnon {amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p..593; Bingham, 1907, p.64, Jordan, 1909<i>a</i>,p. t. 32 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1927, p. 32 (=<i>romulus</i>); id., 1932 <i>a</i>,p. 52(=romulus).</p>

<p><i>Laertias sakontala</i>, Moore, 1903, p.232, pl.465, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>papilio ceylanicus</i>, C.{amp; R.Felder. 1864 <i>a</i>, pp.319, 367.</p>

<p><i>Papilio walkeri,</i> Janson, 1879, p. 433, pl. 8, fig. 2 ({\male}) (S.India); Rothschild, 1895, p.338; Bingham, 1907, p.64, pl.xvi, fig.105 ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 60, t. 32 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1927, p. 32 (=<i>romulus</i>); id., 1932 <i>a</i>,p. 52(=romulus).</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes</i>, Davidson {amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 366(larva, pupa); Bingham, 1907, p. 61, fig. 13 ({\male}); Bell, 1911, p.1117, pl. D.2, figs. 25 ({\male}), 25 <i>a, b</i> ({\female})</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes romulus</i> {\male} ab. <i>astreans</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 61, t. 32 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes pammon</i> {\female} f.<i>cyroides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1909<i>b</i>, p.178.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes</i>{\female} f. <i>rubida</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1909<i>b</i>, p.179. (Malabar).</p>

<p>{\male}.<i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with not very  prominent irrorated lines of pale yellowish scales in the cell and apical area; outer margin with a series  of white spots which are narrower at the edge of the wing. Hind wing with a transverse discal series of elongate white spots  from inner margin to area 7, these spots divided by the black veins and succeeded by diffuse ill-defined sparse blue scaling on the post-discal area; at the tornal angle an abscure spot, of a deeper black than  ground-colour, surmounted by a lunule of blue scales.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to above, with duller and more opaque black ground-colour. Fore wing with cellular and internervular irrorated streaks more prominent. Hind wing with the discal series of white spots and blue scaling succeeded by a submarginal more or less incomplete series of dingy white lunules , and a row of small, inear, white marginal spots; the tornal spot divided from the blue scaling by an ochraceous line. Antenn{\ae}, head thorax, and abdomen black; head and thorax anteriorly above, and head thorax, and abdomen below spotted with white, the latter with lateral white lines.                <i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 90-100mm.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>cyrus</b> Fabr.-Similar to the {\male}; the submarginal series of lunules on the underside ochraceous; in spring specimens these spots are red and larger, often also red on the upperside.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>romulus</b>Cram. (fig.47).- Mimics <i>Polydorus hector</i>, Fore wing crossed obliquely from the middle of the cell to the tornal angle by a board white band somewhat as in <i>P.hector</i>, the edges of the band ill defined; this followed by an ill-defined white patch beyond apex of cell . Hind wing with all the discal, submarginal markings red including a round red spot at the apex of the cell.</p>

<p>{\female} form <b>stichius</b>Hubn. (fig.48).-<i>Upperside</i> fuliginous-black on fore wing, somewhat darker and velvety on hind wing Fore wing darker at the base and along the outer margin, and with dark internervullar streaks that extend into the cell. Hind wing with from two to six discal elongate white spots, and often with one in the apex of the cell; the lower half of area I dark red irrorated with blue scales and with a super-posed black tornal spot; the red extends into area 2 below the elongate white mark; a submarginal curved series of  red lunules, and marginal paler red spots in the posterior interspaces.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to the upperside. Hind wing with a complete series of outer marginal spots, the anterior ones white.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.-This species sometimes produces in the {\male} curious  departures from the normal which come under the category  of aberrations as distinct from forms.</p>

<p>Fig. 47.-<i>polytes romulus</i> f. <i>romulus</i> Cram.,{\female} (Ceylon).</p>
<p>Fig. 46.-<i>polytes romulus</i> Cram.,{\male}.</p>

<p>1.Ab.<b>sakontala</b> Hew.---<i>Upperside</i> dull, somewhat brownish-black. Fore wing very sparingly irrorated with yellowish scales that form ill-defined cellular and internervular streaks. Hind wing with a discal series of very diffuse greenish-white spots in areas 1 to 7 and an ill defined tornal reddish lunule; the spots in areas 5 and 6 are the most diffuse, and beyond the whole series there is a post-discal slight irroration of whitish scales.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing opaque dark brown, the internervular streaks brorader, more prominent than on the upperside. Hind wing black, with a discal series of elongate dingy white spots, larger and more clearly defined than above, followed by a large tornal, more or less vermiliom-red spot with a black centre, and a submarginal series of similarly coloured lunules; the discal spot in area 2 bordered  distally by an outwardly-curved lunule Cilia black alternated with white.</p>
<p><i>Expanse</i>: 107mm.</p>

<p>Only a few specimens have been found, and these were taken at Mussoorie, Sikkim, Assam, Sylhet, and the Naga Hills.</p>

<p>Fig.48.---<i>P.polytes romulus</i> f.<i>stichius</i> H\dd{u}bn.,{\female}(Narkundah, October).</p>

<p>2.Ab. <b>walkeri</b> Jans.---<i>Upperside</i>sooty-black. Fore wing with four short ochraceous lines in the cell, three similar lines in area 1, and two post-discal ones in each of areas 2 to 8; outer margin with small white spots at the end of the veins. Hind wing with a broad transverse discal series ochraceous-white quadrate spots, those in areas 5 and 6 more or less lunular, and a marginal series of similarly coloured very slender lunules.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with dullar ground-colour on the fore wing, more sooty-brown than black. Fore wing as on the upperside, but the lines or bands of the post-discal series more elongate in the anterior interspaces. Hind wing with slightly darker ground-colour, the blue discal band replaced by short, very broad streaks of inwardly ochraceous, outwardly blue scales in areas 1 to 4, and indications of similar streaks in the areas above, the ochraceous and blue scaling of the streaks separated by a black spot; the post-discal spots and marginal narrow lunules as on the upperside but larger; an intervening series of velvety black spots between the discal and post-discal markings. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen sooty-black, a few white specks on the thorax below. </p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 113 mm.</p>

<p>Since a specimen taken in Southern India received this name in 1879 no others have been found.</p>

<p>3.Ab.<b>astreans</b> Jord.---<i>Upperside</i> of fore wing much larger marginal white spots which extend into area 8. Hind wing with the discal white spots replaced by a series of velvety black spots daker than than the ground-colour, borderd on the inner side narrowly, on the outer side much more broadly, by ill-defined diffuse blue scaling; the black tornal spot in area 1 centerd by an irrgular deep ochraceous-red spot; above this a quadrate white spot, and, in line with it in area 2 is a similar but narrower white spot; there is a minute white discal spot also in area 5.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> resembles the upperside, ground-colour duller. Fore wing with larger marginal spots. Hind wing with  discal series of extermely elongate streaks beyond the cell; these streaks are rich ochraceous-red mixed with white, but become pure white in the anterior areas; the streaks in areas 1 to 5 interrupted along their inner halves by a row of spots of a shade darker than the ground-colour and outwardly  borderd by diffuse blue scaling.</p>

<p>A single example was taken in the Nilgiris. A second specimen upon which the name is based, was taken at Coimbatore in South India. In this the two posterior discal spots of the hind wing above are small and white, the others are absent or replaced by bluish nebulous spots, which are joined to a second row of bluish spots. Underside of hind wing with five white discal spots which form the proximal boundary of long red, bluish, and yellowish-grey stripes, whose discal ends correspond to the submarginal spots of normal specimens.</p>

<p>Two unimporant {\female} forms have been named by Fruhstorfer.{\female} f. <b>cyroides</b> Fruhs. is said to represent dry-season <i>cyrus</i> specimens from Sikkim. Fore wing with large ochre-yellow marginal spots; hind wing on both sides with a compelte row of larger pale red submarginal lunules.</p>

<p>The name <b>rubida</b> Fruhst. indicates specimens of <i>romulus</i> {\female} with the red markings of the hind wing much enlarged, especially the patch in area 1 and the cell-spot. The type is illustrated by fig. 1 <i>b</i> on plate 464 in Lep. Ind. vol. v.</p>

<p>Aberrations of the {\female} are even rarer. A remarkable specimen in which two forms are mixed is described and figured by O.C.Ollenbach in the Journ. Bombay Nat.Hist.Soc. xxxiv, p. 832, 1930. The right side is of the <i>romulus</i>  form and the left side of the <i>cyrus</i> form, except for two splashes of red on the white discal band above. The left wings are smaller than  those of the right. The specimen was taken at Dehra Dun in October, 1924, by Miss Floris Tarachand.</p>

<p><i>Bionomics</i>:-The species has been closely studied on Barkunda Island in Lake Chilka, in the north-east corner of Madras (<i>Annandale {amp; Dover, 1921</i>). It is common there, and all three forms of {\female} were taken. The <i>stichius</i> form was much the most abundant, and the <i>cyrus</i> form extremely rare; only one <i>cyrus</i> was taken in two seasons. The <i>stichius</i> form is probably at least three times as abundant as the <i>romulus</i> form. The species bred in considerable numbers in the thickets of <i>Glycosma</i> that cover a large part of the island, and in the opinion of the observers its  abundance was probably due not so much to any special freedom attack bestowed upon it by its polymorphic and mimetic females as to the abundance of its  food-palnts, the scarcity of competitors, and its skill in threading its way through the dense branches and foliage of the shrubs.</p>

<p>The same authors (1921) give an account of the distribution of the {\female} forms. It appears from this the commonest  form is <i>stichius</i> (called <i>polytes</i> by the authors), which occurs all over Peninsular India, extending to Burma, where in the north, it is the only form found. Next comes the <i>romulus</i> form, which ocupies all the area. covered by its model <i>P.hector</i>, and extends to Kumaon, where it occurs in the Terai; in the districts of Dehra Dun and Lucknow it is much less common.</p>

<p>The form <i>cyrus</i> is the least common, and appears to be absent from Kumaon, the Konkan, and around Lucknow and Madras City. It occurs in Tavoy.</p>

<p>No mention is made of Ceylon, Sikkim, or Assam in the table given by Annandale and Dover. If the observations for Peninsular India are correct a more variable relationship exists there between the {\female} forms than is the case in Ceylon, where, as stated previously, a condition of Mendelian stability has been reached.</p>

<p>Williams (1927, p.19) records this species as having taken part in a migratory filght in Ceylon.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CEYLON, the whole of INDIA, and BURMA. Also extending to Tong-king, the Malay Peninsula, Natuna and Lingga Islands.</p>

<p>51 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio polytes stichioides</b> Evans.</p>

<p><i>Papilio polytes stichioides</i>, Evans, 1912, p.972, {\famale} (Andamans and Nicobars); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 52(Andamans).</p>

<p>{\males}. Larger than <i>romulus.  Upperside</i> of hind wing without marginal red lunules, the band broader.</p>

<p>{\female}, <b>cyrus</b> form.---Band of hind wing broader than in the {\males}.</p>

<p>{\female}, <b>stichius</b> form.---Larger than maintained specimens, with very large and pure white discal area of five patches on hind wing.</p>

<p>The name <i>stichioides</i> was based upon a {\female} specimen of the <i>stichius</i> form; the holotype is now los. In 1932 the name was restricted by Evans to Andaman specimens.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ANDAMAN ISLANDS; common, The <i>cyrus</i> {\female} appears to be rare.</p>

<p>51 <i>c</i>. <b>Papilio polytes nikobrus</b> Felder.</p>

<p><i>Papilio pammon var. nikobarus</i>, Felder, 1862, p. 483 (Nicobars); Moore, 1877 <i>a</i>, p. 592; Wood-Mason, 1880, p. 237; Wood-Mason {amp; de Nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 253; id., 1882, p.18.</p>

<p><i>Papilo polytes nikobarus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 61; Evans, 1927, p.32; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.52.</p>	

<p>{\male}.Larger than <i>romulus</i>, and the hind wing upperside with a narrower band.</p>

<p>{\female}, <b>cyrus</b>  form.---Hind wing upperside with submarginal red lunules slightly developed, and band narrow as in the {\male}.</p>

<p>{\female}, <b>stichius</b> form.---Apparently quite similar to mainland specimens.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---NICOBAR ISLANDS; common.  The {\female} form <i>stichius</i> is apparently rather rare.</p>

<p>52. <b>Papilio liomedon</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Papilio liomedon</i>, Moore, 1874 <i>b</i>, p. 575 (Calicut); Hampson, 1889, p.364; Davidson {amp; Aitkin, 1890, p.367, pl. D, figs 1,2,3 (larva, pupa); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 51, t. 21 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio demolion limedon</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 283; Bingham, 1907, pp.44, 45: Evans, 1923, p.238; id., 1927, p. 32; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.52.</p>

<p><i>Araminta liomedon</i>, Moore, 1902, p.221, pl.466, figs. 1 <i>a</i> 1 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa, {\male} {\female}).</p>

<p>This species was conidered by Jordan (1909a) to be distinct from <i>demolion</i> on account of a difference in the genitalia. Both are geographically quite separaed, and although one must have been derived from the the other. it would appear that <i>liomedon</i> has become specifically distinct. similar cases of distinct but closely allied species occur in the Malay islands.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> brownish-black. Both wings crossed by a broad, prominent, oblique, greenish-yellow band from the apex of fore wing to the middle of the inner margin of hind wing; on the fore wing the band is composed of separate spots; on the hind wing the band passes through the apex of the cell. Hind wing with a submarginal series of green-yellow lunules.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> fuliginous-black with transverse band as above, and other markings very smiilar to those in <i>demolion</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 90-100mm.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.---``Harpe of {\male} broad and flat, dentate at the margin, without pointed processes. {\female} armature consisting principally of two dentate and rounded-off triangular chitinous lobes, each of which is placed laterally behind the vaginal opening'' (<i>Jordan,</i> 1909a),</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i>.---The following account is from Davidson and Aitken (1890):--A {\female} was observed laying its eggs on a tender shoot of a small jungle tree or shrub (<i>Acronychia laurifolia</i> B1.). There were ``ten eggs laid one on top of the other.'' Of the caterpillars which emerged five days after the eggs were laid, ``five passed successfully through all dangers and became beautiful specimens, one female and four males. (This is one of the  butterflies of which we rarely find females). All through their lives these larv{\ae} continued gregarious, dispersing occasionally to feed, but always returning to rest side by side on the upper surface of a leaf. The following dates may be interesting. Eggs laid 2nd August, hatched 7th August; skins cast (and eaten) 12th August; again 17th August; again 20th to 22nd August. The most advanced cast its skin again on the 28th  August, became a pupa on the 2nd September, and emerged on the 15th September. The others followed within two days. At first the larv{\ae} were of an oily yellow colour and bore many pairs of spiny points, but these disappeared with age, and after the last moult there were only the short fleshy processes on the 2nd and last segment which characterize the group, and one additional curved pair on the 9th segment.</p>

<p>``The colour after the last moult was a clear slaty-blue, changing eventually to a greenish tint, with light brown markings very much the same as those which characterize the rest of the group. The pupa was more abruptly bent back from the middle of the thorax than that of <i>P.erithonius (i. e. P.demoleus)</i> and adorned on the thorax  with a sword-shaped horn, fully three-eighths of an inch long, and always bent either to the right or the left. The colour was brown or green and yellow according to situation.''</p>

<p>Bell (in MSS.) notes:--``Many eggs are parasitized by a very small black ichneumon; in a stick of eggs none escape as a rule. The larv{\ae} are often parasitied, but by a different species of ichneumon; if one larva of a brood suffers, then the whole lot perish as a rule. The mortality, calculated in deposited. The imago is usually local, in some years scarce. In 1901 in Karwar it was extremely numerous. Some are always to be caught in the monsoon months at the tops of hills in the jungle, where they fly along through the tree-tops in the thickest places. The females flies lower down in even come near the ground. Hannyngton says it is double-brooded, and comes to flowers. of <i>Muss{\ae}nda frondosa</i>Linn., family Rubiace{\ae}.</p>	

<p>``Kanara specimens show a slight sprinkling of yellow scales on the upperside of fore wing in both sexes, and the hind wing underside at the base is sprinkled plentifully with grey scales inside the broad white band.''</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTHERN INDIA.</p>

<p>According to Yates (1931) this is the rarest <i>Papilio</i> found in Coorg, where, it freequents evergreen forest, and is attracted by the flowers of <i>Muss{\ae}nda frondosa, Lantana,</i> and <i>Clerodendron</i> among others. Occasionally comes to water.</p>

<p><b>Papilio demolion</b> Cramer.</p>

<p>Resembles <i>limedon</i>, the posterior spots of the band of the fore wing always contiguous, and on hind wing the band does not enter the cell.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.--``Harpe of {\male} almost linear, and bears towards the base and at the tip a long spine-like process. The {\female} armature consists proncipally of two  dentate, pointed, triangular chitinous lobes, each of which is placed laterally behind the vaginal opening'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909a).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--Frequents wooded country and visits flowers, before which it hovers with a fluttering motion of the wing, as it sucks the honey. Ollenbach (1921 a), writing of this species in Tavoy, says it is ``common in dense forest in the hills and occasionally along streams at the foot of the hills. It has a very rapid flight, and is difficult to catch. It has a regular beat, round and round which it goes during the warmest hours of the day.''   </p>
<p><i>Distribution</i>.--BURMA to Lombok and Palawan. One of the three known subspecies is found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>53. <b>Papilio demolion demolion</b> Cramer.</p>

<p><i>Papilio demolion</i>, Cramer, 1776, p.140, pl.89, figs. A,B; Horsfield {amp; Moore, 1857, p. 105, pl. 3, figs. 5 (larva), 5 <i>a</i>(pupa); Fountaine, 1915 <i>a</i>, p. 456, pl.66, figs. 1 (microp.), 2 (larva), 3 (pupa), 4 (imago); id., 1915 <i>b</i>, p.1xxix; Ollenbach, 1921 <i>a</i>, p.895.</p>

<p><i>Papilio demolion demolion</i>, Rothschild, 1895, pp. 282-3; Bingham, 1907, pp.41, 44; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 51, t. 21 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1923, p. 238, pl.iv, fig. A 4.26 ({\male}); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 52, p1. iv, fig. A 4.26 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Araminta demolin</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 219, p1. 460, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>-1 <i>c</i> ({\male} {\female}, larva, pupa).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> brownish-black. Fore and hind wings crossed by a broad, prominent, oblique, pale greenish- or yellowish-white band that commences just before the continued on the fore wing as a series of spots that diminish in size anteriorly to the apex of the wing; on the hind wing this is followed by a submarginal series of similarly coloured lunules</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> fuliginous-black, with transverse band as above. Fore wing with four slender longitudinal pale lines in the cell; the veins also picked out with pale lines; on the veins that run to the outer margin these lines are conspicuous only at the apices; there are besides short similar lines between the veins that extend to the outer margin. Hind wing with post-discal broad jet-black streaks reaching the submarginal lunules; these streaks medially interrupted by a transverse line of blue scales, and succeeded in areas  1 and 7 by preapical ochraceous-yellow spots; outer margin beyond the line of lunules black. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen fuliginous-black; beneath, the palpi and abdomen greenish-white. thorax dark grey. {\female} with anal ring of hind wing more red than in <i>liomedon</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 90-100mm.</p>
<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTH BURMA; not rare.</p>

<p><i>Demoleus Group</i>.</p>

<p>Body without white dots, entirely yellow beneath or at most with black lines. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with base of cell striped with pale yellow; the greater part of the hind wing or at least a larger central area pale yellow. Hind wing with or without a short slender tail.</p>

<p><b>Papilio demoleus</b> Linn{\ae}us. (Fig. 49 <i>a, b</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p></p>{\male} {\female}. Body below, head at the sides, and a stripe on each side of thorax pale yellow. Fore wing above at the base dotted with pale yellow, those dots united into transverse lines; a large cell-pale usually divided into two spots, at the upper angle of cell two or three spots; a macular discal band, the upper spots small and placed far apart, the posterior ones large and usually contiguous; band on the hind wing not interrupted; both wings with a row of submarginal spots and small marginal lunules; hind wing a red anal spot. Not tailed.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.---Harpe (fig.49) a cup-like plate which fills the basal half (and more) of the value cavity; its ventral edge is rounded and thickend, and its dorsal edge rises into a thin chitinous wall of considerable height, the summit of which is serrated with sharp teeth; this dorsal edge consists of three parallel lammi{ae} of various lengths and heights, of which the inmost (also the tallest) alone is serrate (Gosse; 1883).</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.---Pale yellow.</p>

<p>Fig. 49.--<i>P. demoleus</i> Linn.,genitalia. (After Gosse).</p>

<p><i>a</i>, value and harpe; <i>b</i>,harpe, dorsal view, showing the elevated triple wall.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``The young larva blackish, a large V-spot in the middle, a lateral stripe from the prothorax backwards, and a second stripe, running from the anal segment forwards, milky-white; serveral rows of setiferous processes'' (Jordan, 1909a).</p> 

<p>Full-green larva:--Body above yellow-green, with a fairly broad greasy-looking white lateral band from segment 5 to the end. The perpendicular. part of the anal segment is whitish. The green dorsal part of segments 2 to 5 is bordered narrowly with a curved black line, and does not reach the base of the legs, the part below, as well as abdomen and legs, being a dirty transparent white. On segments 8 to 9 is a diagonal band reaching from the centre of 9 near dorsum to the anterior margin of segment 8; this band is irregular in contour and is yellow-brown spotted with lighter colour. There is a similarly coloired patch at the posterior lower margin of segment 10. Prolegs large and fleshy. The bands are sometimes obsolescent. Osmeterium flesh-coloured. Length 33 mm.;  Width 7 mm. (from <i>Bell</i>, 1911).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.-- Head with two short frontal projections which are separated widely and squarely by a sharp ridge forming the front margin of head. Abdomen, dorsally on segments 4 to 8 rather flat, the wing-expansions very slight, so that at segment 7 the pupa is very little broader Than at the shoulders. Cremaster square and broad. A pair of very small tubercles at the base of each of the head-projections, and a subdorsal one on each of segment 8 to 11. Colour green, mixed with yellow on dorsum of abdomen. When a pupa is formed in a cage or not among leaves it is  generally different shades of browns and greys. Length 30 mm.; Width 10 mm. (from <i>Bell</i>, 1911).</p>

<p><i>Habit</i>.--The larva feeds on plants of the family Rustaceae. It is much subject to attack by parasites. The pupa is formed on the underside of a underside of a leaf, against a stalk or twing, and the supporting loop is rather short.</p>

<p>The butterfly has a very quick and strong flight. It does not rise much above the ground and is fond of flowers and the sun, visiting by preference the flowers of <i>Citrus</i> trees and <i>Raphanus</i>; it also congregates at puddles, where it drinks with closed wings. It is commoner in the plains than in wooded country and hills, and may be seen on the wing throughtout the year. Recorded by williams (1927, p. 19) as having taken part in a migratory flight in Ceylon.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--China to the Malay Peninsula, the smaller Sunda Islands to N. Australia and South New Guinea; absent from the Philippines, the large Sunda Islands, Celebes, and the Moluccas. Its range extends to Persia, Arabia, and the whole of Africa. Only about six subspecies are known, two which occurin the Indian area.</p>

<p>54 a. <b>Papilio demoleus demoleus</b> Linn{\ae}us (Fig. 50, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio demoleus</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p.464; Clerck, 1764, t. 6, fig. 1; Ghosh, 1914, p. 34 (early stages); Bell, 1911, p.1116 p1.D 5, fig.27({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio demolus demoleus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p.279; Bingham, 1907, pp. 35, 39, fig. 7; Seitz, 1907, p.18, t. 6 <i>d</i> ; Jordan,1909 <i>a</i>, p.48; Evans, 1923, p. 238, p1 5, fig. A 4.27({\male}); id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 52, p1. v, fig. A 4.27 ({\male}); id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p.198 (Baluchistan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio erithonius</i>, Cramer, 1780 <i>a</i>, p. 67, pl. 232, figs.6 (larva), 6 <i>a</i> (pupa); Gosse, 1883, p. 314, p1.xxxi, figs. 9-12(genitalia); Davidson {amp; Aitken, 1890, p.366; Fletcher, 1925, p. 179 (migration).</p> 

<p><i>Orpheides erithonius</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 147, p1. 61 fig. 2; id., 1902, p. 234, p1. 466, figs. 1,1<i>a-</i>1 <i>c</i> ({\male} {\female}, larva, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio epius</i>, Fabricius, 1793, p.35.</p>

<p><i>Papilio erithonius</i> var. <i>demoleinus,</i> Oberth\dd{u}r, 1879, p.57.</p>

<p><i>Papilio demoleus</i> f. <i>demoleinus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.48.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with the base below cell and basal half of latter so irrorated with yellow scales as to form more or less complete transverse dotted lines; two outwardly oblique yellow spots in the cell and a curved spot at its upper apex; a spot at the base and another beyond it in area 8; a discal transverse series of creamy-yellow spots, irregular in arrangement and size, extends from area 1 <i>a</i> to 8, interrupted in area 5, and the spot in area 7 double; this is followed by a sinuous poster-discal series of spots and a marginals series of smaller spots. In many specimens between the discal and post-discal series the black ground-colour is irrorated with yellowish scales. Hind wing with the base, and an edging that decreases in width along the inner margin, irrorated with yellow scales; a broad discal irregular yellow band, its inner edge curved inwards, its outer edge very irregular and uneven; this band crosses the cell and does not reach the apex; beyond the cell a few creamy-yellow spots, and the ground-colour irrorated with yellowish scales; a sinuous post-discal series of outwardly emarginate yellow spots, and a marginal series of yellow spots as on the fore wing; at the tornal angle an ovel ochraceous-red spot emarginate on its inner side in the {\female} and in both sexes surmounted by blue lunule; in area 7 between the discal and post-discal spot is a large ocellus-like spot of the black ground-colour, more or less irrorated with blue scales.</p>

<p>Fig. 50.--<i>P. demoleus demoleus </i> (Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with similar ground-colour, the markings paler and much larger. Fore wing in the basal half cell and base of wing below it with cream-coloured streaks that coalesce at the base; irregular ochraceous spots in area 5 to 8, and the discal band not interrupted in area 5. Hind wing black at the base, and along the inner margion centred largely with pale cream-colour; the ocellus in area 7, the apex of cell, and the black ground-colour between the discal and post-discal markings in areas 2 to 6 centred with ochraceous, margined with blue. Antenn{\ae} dark reddish-brown, touched with ochraceous on inner side towards the club; head thorax, and abdomen dusky black,  palpi, thorax, and abdomen beneath cream-yellow, the latteral longitudinal lines.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 80-100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.--The red spot of the hind wing is sometimes reduced proimimally, and therefore separated from the blue lunule by a black spot. This is f. <b>demoleinus</b> Ob.</p>

<p>Many specimens have on the fore wing above a small discal spot before vein 5; sometimes (especially in Ceylon specimens) there are two small spots on the hind wing above, outside the cell, between veins 4 and 6.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--CEYLON, the whole of INDIA to NORTHERN BURMA. Also extending to Persia and Arabia. Very common.</p>

<p>54 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio demoleus malayanus</b> Wallace.</p>

<p><i>Papilio erithonius</i> var. <i>malayanus</i>, Wallace, 1865, p.59; Distant, 1885, p.350, p1.27 <i>b</i>, fig. 6.</p>

<p><i>Papilio demoleus malayanus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 281; Bingham, 1907, pp. 39, 40; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 48; Evans, 1927, p.33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 52.</p>

<p><i>Orpheides malayanus</i>, Moore, 1889, p.50.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the three posterior patches of the discal band broader than in the nominotypical from, and less than a fourth of the cell at the apex is black. Intermediate examples occur between the two races in parts of Burma.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTHERN BURMA, extending to Annam, Siam, and the Malay Peninsula; common.</p>

<p>55. <b>Papilio alexanor alexanor</b> Esper.</p>

<p><i>Papilio alexanor</i>, Esper, 1799, p.89, t. cx, cont. t. 1xv, fig. 1; Verity, 1905-11, p.8, p1. v, fig. 6,{\female}; Seitz, 1907, p. 13, t. 7 <i>a</i>; Evans, 1923, p.238; id., 1927, p. 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 198 (Baluchistan).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Pattern similar to <i>machaon.  Upperside</i> of fore wing with the basal third not entirely black, but bordered basally and distally by a broad black band. The bands are continued across the hind wing, bordering also here the cell, placed near vein 3 and more proximal than an <i>machaon</i>; also a bar across the  end of the cell. Hind wing with a black bar across end of cell, heavier than in <i>machaon</i> and reaching vein 3 or below it. Abdomen yellow, with a wide  black dorsal band.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---Whitish-green, with a black band on the anterior part of each segment, and nine black and yellow dots. Feeds on <i>Seseli dioicum, S.montanum, Ptychotis heterophylla</i>, and other Umberllifer{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.---Differs from <i>machaon</i> in being flattened on the dorso-ventral side, the head square and not bifurcate, the three thoracic processes only slightly producesses only slightly produced. Light or dark-grey with darker patches. It is fastened upon stones and resembles a small splinter of of stone.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---A strictly Pal{\ae}arctic species which enters BALUCHISTAN, where it is extremely rare. Its real home is the Mediterranean region, extending to East Persia and Turkestan.</p>

<p><b>Papilio machaon</b> Linn{\ae}us.  (Fig. 51 <i>a-c</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>A very variable species, with about thirty-five subspecies in Europe and Asia, seven of these occurring in the Indian area . The Indian races mix freely with each other where  they meet, and so transitional forms are found are found in such areas.</p>

<p>Fig. 51.---<i>P.machacon</i> Linn., genitalia. (After Gosse)</p>

<p><i>a</i>, value and harpe;  <i>b</i>, harpe; <i>c</i>, lateral view of genitalia with both valves removed.</p>

<p>The species has formed the subject of detailed investigation by Eller (1936), who is still pursuing his researches. This work has been followed in the treatment of this species here.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with basal area more or less irrorated with yellow scaling; a bar across end of cell; a yellow discal  band formed of somewhat oblong patches, the patch in 1 a larger than the ohers, and those in 1 a to 4 placed close to the cell; anterior patches smaller and more widely separated ; a submarginal row of small yellow spots, between which and the discal band is a line or band of blue scaling. Hind wing with proximal yellow area, which reaches to beyond the cell, the veins crossing it,or at least the middle discocellular, more or less darkened; inner margin usually blackish; a submarginal row of yellow spots which are larger than those on the fore wing, and between these and the yellow area is a line or band of blue scaling; a prominent red tornal spot; at vein 4 the wing produced to a slender tail.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.---Harpe (fig. 51 <i>a, b</i>) a knife-like blade, its dorsal edge minutely serrate, slightly incurved and broader posteriorly (<i>Gosse,</i>), 1883, p. 302, p1.xxix, figs. 14-16).</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.---Spherical and relatively large. At first yellow, but later with reddish markings. Deposited on young shoots or on the flowers, usually singly, but sometimes in a group of four or five.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---The young larva is black, with numerous tubercles and a white band round he middle. After the first moult it is black with orange tubercles, the band being greenish-white. After the third moult there are green bands round most of the segments. After the fourth moult these bands are larger and the tubercles are reddish. In the penultimate  instar the larva is green, with a black band between and upon each segment, also each segment, bears six to eight pointed orange-red tubercles. In the final instar the tubercles are reduced to red or yellow spots. The size of the black bands is very variable. The osmeterium is bright orange.</p>

<p><i>Food-plant</i>.--Species of Umbellifer{\ae}, especially <i>Daucus</i>. The larva is much The larva is much attacked by ichneumons.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--With two rows of dorsal tubercles; head bifurcate. Colouered green, brown or grey, according to the surface upon which it rests.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-- The whole Pal{\ae}arctic Region to Siberia and Alsaka, inclusive of North Africa, but not of Madeira or the Canary Islands; in NORTHERN INDIA from BALUCHISTAN to  NORTHERN BURMA. A very variable species, which splits into many subspecies, four of which occur in the Indian area.s</p>

<p>56.<i>a</i>. <b>Papililo machaon centralis</b> Staudinger.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon</i> var. <i>centralis</i>. Staudinger, 1886, p. 193 (Turkestan); Seitz, 1907, p. 12; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53; id., 1932 <i>b</i>, p. 198 (Baluchistan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio hippocrates</i> f. <i>centralis</i>, Verity, 1905-11, pp. 14, 295, p1.ii, fig. 9, t. 1ii, fig. 3, t. 1xi, fig. 15 ({\female}).</p>
<p>{\male} {\female}. Characterized by the extended yellow markings. Fore wing  strongly dusted with yellow at the base. Hind  wing at the base and inner margin only slightly black. Abdomen of the {\male} pale yellow without black markings, in the {\female} with a narrow stripe of reddish-brown.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habbitat</i>.---BALUCHISTAN and the NORTH-WEST FRONTIER; not rare. Belongs strictly to Turkestan.</p>

<p>56 <i>b</i>. <b>Papilio machaon asiatica</b> M\'en\'etries. (Fig. 52<i>a</i>, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio asiatica</i>, Moore, 1882, p. 258.</p>
<p><i>Papilio machaon asiatica</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 47; Seitz, 1907, p, 12, t. 6 <i>b</i>; Riloy, 1927, p.120; Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p. 120; id., 1932 <i>a</i> p. 53; Eller, 1936, p.40.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon sphyrus</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 36, fig. 6 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon archies</i> var. <i>sikkimensides</i>, Vertiy, 1911, p. 296, p1. 1xii, fig. 1 ({\female}, South Kashmir).</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon chitralensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1934, p. 175 (Chitral),</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon sculda</i>, Peschke, 1934, p. 430 (Kashmir).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. This race is very close to <i>sphyrus</i>  H\dd{u}., the dark form Southern Europe. It has always very broad black bands, and differs chiefly from <i>sphyrus</i> in having the yellow-dusted discal band of the hind wing beneath much narrower at vein 4.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing dull black irrorated on its basal third withyellow scales, which also form a transverse diffuse post-discal band and a diffus preapical spot; broad band across the middle of the cell, another narrower and similar band at its apex, a narrow streak at base of area 9, a quadrate spot near base of area 8, a transverse discal series of broad stripes that decrease in length towards the costa in areas 1 a to 7, and a submarginal series of crescentic spots creamy-yellow area comprising the cell and stripes beyond the cell are variable in length and occupy fully three-fourths of the inner margin and of area 1; they decrease suddenly and considerably in areas 2 to 5 and lengthen again in the anterior areas. Distal area of wing black with a superposed post-discal transverse series of diffuse blue spots and a submarginal series of cream-coloured Lunules. An ochraceous-red tornal spot below the blue post-discal spot in area 1 ; base and inner margin shaded with black irrorated with yellow scales; fringes prominently yellow between the veins. The depth of the tint of the cream-coloured portions of both wings is very variable; so also is the width of the black areas, especially on the hind wing, and the size of the blue post-discal spots on this wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i>pale cream-colour. Fore wing with two transverse short bands across the cell, and one beyond its apex where it borders the discocellulars; a prominent broad transverse discal band and a marginal broad line; all these markings black; the bands across the cell and beyond its apex more or less diffuse, the discal band with its middle very broadly cream-coloured from areas 2 to 7, and thickly sprinkled with black scales. Hind wing with the veins and a marginal broad line black; the black on the upperside shows through as an irregular, transverse, sinuous bluish discal band thickly sprinkled with black scales, and is bordered on its inner and outer edges by broken transverse black lines, the inner line margined on the outer side by a diffuse blue scaling, and on the inner side in areas 3 and 4 by an ochraceous-red spot; tornal spot and frings of both wings as above. Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen cream-colour, on the upperside with a black mesial streak, which is narrow in the {\ae} and very broad in the {\female}; abdomen beneath with narrow lateral ill-defined black lines.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 75-90 mm.</p>

<p>Fig. 52.---<i>a, P. machaon asiatica</i> Me\'e.; <i>b, P. machaon ann{\ae}</i> Gistel. tornal portion of hind wing.</p>

<p>{\male}. Differs from <i>ladakensis</i> in the longer tails, in the usually narrower and more acute fore wing, in the increased black markings, and in the position and extent of the submarginal bands, which are uniformly broad, and reduced, especially in the cell. The veins on the hind wing in <i>ladakensis</i> bear few scales or none, but in <i>asiatica</i> they are entirely scaled, The inner area of hind wing and the abdomen not so strongly hairy as in <i>ladakensis</i>, the hairs darker. <i>Upperside</i> with both submarginal dark bands usuallly present, whilst in <i>ladakensis</i> the distal band is absent; the stripe dividing the two bands in <i>iasiatica</i> is yellowish, but in <i>ladakensis</i> the greater part of this area is yellow, and the stripe appears yellowish-green.</p>

<p>At least two broods occur, expect at the higher elevations. The summer specimens are larger than those which emerge from hibernated pup{\ae} in the spring.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---North of the Indus; CHITRAL and KASHMIR to Tibet as far as Everest (Rongshar Vally). Occurs in the valleys from February to October, but in the mountains not before March or April, from 2,000 to 14,000 feet.</p>

<p>56 <i>c</i>.<b>Papilio machaon ladakensis</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Papilio ladakensis</i>, Moore, 1884, p.46 (Ladak); id., 1903, p. 43, p1.482, fig.2 ({\male}) (Ladak).</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon</i> var. <i>ladakensis</i>, Verity, 1906-11, pp. 14, 298, p1. v, fig.9 ({\male}), p1.1x, fig.16 ({\male}, Dras), fig. 17 ({\female}, Ladak), p1.1xi, fig.3 ({\male},Dras).</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon asiatica</i> f. <i>ladakensis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon ladakensis</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p.33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53; Eller, 1936, p. 62, t. viii, fig .30 (imago), t. xii, fig. 18 (genitaila).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Distinguished from <i>asiatica</i> by the short tail. <i>Upperside</i> paler yellow. Fore wing plentifully with yellow; cell-bars shorter and broader, the inner bar usually quadrate; discal band comparatively narrower, the veins crossing it less heavily black; submarginal spots broader. Hind wing with the outer edge of the yellow basal area incurved between the veins; submarginal spots shorter and somewhat broader; anal spot smaller and broader.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--- LADAK, at high elevations, extending to the Pamirs at over 13,000 feet.</p>

<p>56 <i>d</i>, <b>Papilio machaon penjabensis</b> Eimer</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon penjabensis</i>, Eimer, 1895, p. 104 (Dehra Dun, Allahabad); Verity, 1911, p. 296, p1. ii, fig. 4 ({\male}); Eller, 1936, p.62, p1.vi, fig. 27 (imago), p1. xii, fig. 20 (genitalia).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. A smaller form  than <i>asiaticus</i>, the fore wing narrower, the tail, longer, and with narrower submarginal bands.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---PUNJAB to KUMAON.</p>

<p>56 <i>e</i>, <b>Papilio machaon emihippocrates</b> Verity.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon</i> var. <i>emihippocrates</i>, Verity, 1911, p. 296 (Nepal), p1.1xi, figs. 8, 9 ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio asiatica</i>, Moore (non M\'en), 1903, p1.481, fig. 1.<i>c</i>.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. In this race, which is only slightly differentiated from <i>penjabesis</i>, the markings of the latter are more emphasized. Fore wing marginal band black, its discal edge sinuate; submarginal band anterirly wedge-shaped. Hind wing marginal band broad, reaching almost to the cell, the spots in areas 4 and 5 being very small; blue spots not developed anteriorly in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---NEPAL.</p>

<p>56 <i>f</i>. <b>Papilio machaon ann{\ae}</b> Gistel. (Fig. 52 <i>b</i>, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio ann{\ae}</i>, Gistel, 1857, p.603</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon ann{\ae}</i>, Hemming, 1935, p. 122.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon sikkimensis</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 276; Bingham, 1907, pp. 37-8, fig. 6 <i>b</i>; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 47; Seitz, 1907, p.12; Verity, 1906-11, p. 15, p1.3, fig. 4, p1. 52, fig. 6; Riley, 1927, p. 120; Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p. 30; id, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Disinguished from <i>asiatica</i> by the still broader black bands, and by the red tornals spot on hind wing being separated from the blue crescent by a curved black mark.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the discal pathes much shorter than in <i>asiatics</i>, and conspicuously separated from one another by the broad black edgings to the veins. Hind wing with inner margin very broadly bordered with black, which in area 1 all but merges into the black marginals area; the inner edge of this black area extends straight across the wing and is only slightly curved, not zigzag.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> darker than in <i>asiatica</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM to BHUTAN; not rare: more common in Tibetan territory.</p>

<p>56 <i>g</i>. <b>Papilio machaon verityi</b> Fruhstorfer.</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon verityi</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>d</i>. p. 301 (Yunnan); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 47; Verity, 1905-11, p. 16, pl. 61, fig. 7 ({\male}) (P.hippocrates race); Rosen, 1929, p. 9; Evans 1923, p.239, p1. 5, fig. A 4.29 ({\male}); id., 1927, p. 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53, p1. v, fig. A 4.29 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio machaon birmanicus</i>, Rothschild, 1908, p. 168 (Shan States).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Discal band of both wings narrower than in <i>sikkimensis</i>. Hind wing with long tail; tornal red spot very large and not black-edged below; upper and middle discocellulars broadly black; the inner margin only narrowly black, so that the area behind the cell and vein 2 remains yellow for the most parts.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ASSAM to NORTHERN BURMA; rare occurs also sin Western Yunnan and the adjoining parts of East Tibet.</p>

<p><b>Papilio xuthus</b> Linn{\ae}us.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. The veins broadly black. Fore wing with the basal two-thirds of cell striped with pale yellow. The yellow stripe placed behind the cell on  both wings extends to the base.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.--``Greenish-black, with irregular patches and bands of a milky-white colour. It has the habit of resting motionless on the upper side of the upper side of the leaves, and resembles a bird-dropping'' (<i>Graeser</i>, quoted by Verity, 1905-11).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--A mainly Pal{\ae}arctic species extending from Japan and Korea southwards to UPPER BURMA; occurring also on Formosa, Luzon, the Bonin Islands, and Guam. Only the nominotypical form occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>In the Pal{\ae}arctic area the spring and summer forms are rather different and possess distinctly different genitalia.</p>

<p>57. <b>Papilio xuthus xuthus</b> Linn{\ae}us.</p>

<p><i>Papilio xuthus</i>,Linn{\ae}us, 1767, p. 751; Horsfield {amp; Moore, 1857, p.111, p1. fig.1 (larva); Rothschild, 1895,p. 503; Seitz, 1907, pp. 11-12, fig. 6<i>a</i>; Verity, 1905-11, pp. 18,299; Bingham, 1907, pp.38.9; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 48; Evans, 1927, p. 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.53; Wileman, 1914, p. 250, pls. 1-4 (larva).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xuthus</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1767, p. 751.</p>

<p><i>Papilio xuthus</i> ab. gen. {\ae}st, <i>xanthus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p.278; Moore, 1903, p.45.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black with cream-coloured markings. Fore wing with four or five slender, somewhat broken streaks in the cell that extend from the base for two-thirds of its length; following these is a short transverse bar and another similar bar along the discocellulars; a streak from the base not extended beyond the disc in areas 1 <i>a</i>, and 1, the streak in the latter angulated downloads below the orgion of vein 2, its apical portion double;  a discal series of elongate subtriangular spots, that decrease in size towards the costa, in areas 2 to 7, the spots in 6 and 7 with an oval black medical spot generally dividing them in two; a spot near base of area 8 followed by a diffuse small patch of similarly coloured scales; a complete submarginal series of lunules. In the {\female} between the discal and submarginal series there is a complete post-discal series of transverse, somewhat diffuse pale spots. Hind wing with a broad basal cell-streak nearly filling the cell; a basal streak in area 1 extended for three-fourths the length of this area; shorter streaks beyond the cell; that in area 7 interrupted by a large black spot (paler in the {\female}); a post-discal series of diffuse spots, cream-coloured (except the tornal spot, which is blue) in the {\male}, blue in the {\female}, followed by a submarginal series of cream-coloured lunules, the lunule at the tornal angal centred with black in the {\male}, in the {\female} also centred with black, but with its upper half ochraceous; the lunule in area 8 with its upper horn elongate, produced down the tail.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing similar to above, the cream-coloured markings broader, the post-discal spots present also in the {\male}; in the both sexes that and the submarginal series form continuous bands. Hind wing with the cream-coloured markings very broad on the basal half of the wing, separated only by the black veins; a discal irregular black band composed of large black spots between the veins, these spots traversed on their inner halves by a line of diffuse blue and cream-coloured scaling, and in some of the areas margined inwardly and outwardly by a shading of ochraceous; the submarginal series as above but much larger, and formed of somewhat irregular quadrate spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``Very similar to that of <i>P. bianor</i>; bright green; grey, white-marked, transverse band on the third fifth and twelfth somites, a similar oblique band over the seventh and eight segments; above the prolegs large, rounded white spots''(<i>Seitz</i>, 1907).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--Green, rarely brown; the anterior abdominal segments laterally somewhat swollen and carinate; caputal processes strongly developed, an abtuse, somewhat thorn-like process on thorax ''(<i>Seitz</i>, 1907).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---In Japan the larva feeds on <i>{\AE}gle sepiario</i> DC., a common shrub used for hedges; also feeds on <i>Citrus nobilis</i> Lour. The butterfly has a heavier flight than <i>P. machaon</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---NORTHERN BURMA; very rare.</p>

<p>Tribe III. GRAPHIINI</p>

<p>The members of this division are known as Kite Swallow tails, as the long wings and long tails of the majority of species give them a kite-like appearance. They are found in all parts of the world.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae} short strong club; upperside in fresh specimens scaled like the tibi{\ae} tarsi, the fine sensory hairs almost uniformly distributed over the proximal part of the underside of each segment. Tarsi with the dorsal spines separated from the vental ones by a spineless, somewhat impressed intespace. Wings in most species thinly scaled semitransparent, especially in the costal part of fore wing. The green and bluish bands and spots on the upper surface mostly without scales, sometimes also on the under-surface. Fore wing in most species of <i>Graphium</i> with vein 11 running into 12; in some species vein 10 is also united with 12. Hind wing with inner margin bent over upwards and the edge fringed with long hairs; {\male} with usually a patch of yellowish scent-wool inside the fold. Hind wing mostly narrow, its costal margin incurved between veins 7 and 6 (from <i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``The young larva with forked hairs; full-grown in the Indo-Australian forms, so far as is known, with a pair of short spines on each of the three thoracic segments and the last segment, the thorax swollen'' <i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--``Smooth, in the middle rounded in barrel-shape, the wing-cases not projecting, the thoracic horn four-sided, the lateral carin{\ae} forming the prolongation of the upper edge of the wing-cases; on the dorsum two carin{\ae}, converging anteriorly and posteriorly; anal segment longer than broad'' <i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---``They are all good fliers and occur in wooded districts; the mimetic forms imitate the slow flight of their models. The males often rest together in crowds at wayside puddles and on the moist sand of river-banks and can mostly be attracted by urine and the like. The females are taken singly in the woods''<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p>The Oriental species can be divided into the two genera <i>Graphium</i> Scop. and <i>Lamproptera</i> Grey. The Oriental species of <i>Graphium</i> can be divided into six groups, of which four occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key  to Genera</i>.</p>

<p>1. Hind wing not folded and not produced.
      Antenn{\ae} not reaching beyond apex of cell  <p>[p.200.</p>
      of fore wing ...  .  .. ..  .   ..</p>   <p>GRAPHIUM Scop.,</p>
      
<p>2. Hind wing folded and produced to a long tail.
      Antenn{\ae} reaching beyond apex of cell       <p>[p.243.</p>
      of fore wing</p>                      <p>LAMPROPTERA Gray,</p>
      
<p>Genus <b>GRAPHIUM</b> Scopli.(Fig. 53, vention).</p>

<p><i>Graphium</i>, Scopoli, 1777, p.433; Hemming, 1933, p. 199 (type, <i>sarpedon</i> Linn.); id., 1934, p.151.</p>

<p><i>Iphiclides</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819 (6), p. 82; Scudder, 1872, p. 65 (type, <i>podalirius</i> Linn.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 151.</p>

<p><i>Zetides</i>, H\dd{u}bner, 1819, p. 85; Scudder, 1875, p. 292 (type, <i>sarpedon</i> Linn.)., Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 151 (=Graphium); Evans, 1923,pp. 230, 240; id., 1927, pp.25, 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 41, 54</p>

<p><i>Chlorisses</i>, Swainson, 1832, p1.89 (<i>sarpedon</i> Linn.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 152 (=Graphium).</p>

<p><i>Pathysa</i>, Reakirt, 1864, p. 503 (type, <i>antiphates</i> Cram.); Evans, 1923, pp. 230, 239; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, pp.41, 53.</p>

<p><i>Delchina</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 146 (type, <i>thermodusa</i> Swinh.).</p>

<p>Dabasa, Moore, 1887, p. 283 (type, <i>gyas</i> Westw.)</p>

<p><i>Mendrusa</i>, Moore, 1887, p. 284 (type, <i>evan</i> DoubI.); Evans, 1923, pp.230, 241; id.,1927, p. 25, p1. 6; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, pp.42, 57.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis</i>, de Nic\'eville {amp; Wood-Mason, 1887, p. 376 (type, <i>macareus</i>); Evans, 1923, pp. 230, 241; id., 1927, pp.25, 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, pp. 41, 54.</p>

<p><i>Pazala</i>, Moore, 1888, p.(type, <i>glycerion</i> Gray).</p>

<p><i>Cosmodesmus</i>, Haase, 1892; Seitz, 1907, p. 14</p>

<p><i>Deoris</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 31 (type, <i>agetes</i> Westw.),</p>

<p>The characters for this genus are, for the most part, these given for the tribe. With the exception of the species <i>payeni</i> and <i>gyas</i>, in the Indian area, vein 11 of the fore wing is connected with vein 12.</p>

<p><i>Key to Groups</i>.</p>

<p>1.Fore wing with vein 11 running into vein 12.           <p>2.</p>
     Fore wing with vein 11 free; tail spatulate.. .. .. . ..</p> <p>PAYENI Group, p.239.</p>
     
<p>2.Tail long and gradually pointed                         <p>ANTIPHATES Group,</p>
     Tail absent or short and obtuse... .. .</p>          <p>3.             [p.203.</p>
     
<p>3.Hind wing below with  a red or yellow discal spot or traces of one, <p>[.217.</p>
     and one or two red or yellow subbasal spots ....       <p>EURYPYLUS Group,</p> 
     Hind wing below without a red  or yellow                     <p>[p.232</p>
     discal spot</p>                                       <p>MACAREUS Group,</p>

<p><i>Key to Species</i>.</p>

<p>A. ANTIPHATES Group.</p>

<p>1. Fore wing above with a double discocellular 
      bar enclosing two pale spots; 
      four dark bars in the cell . . .. .</p>   <p>2.</p>
      Fore wing below with a single discocellular bar. ... ..   <p>3.</p>

<p>2. Hind wing below with a compelete discal row of pale spots .. .. . 
                                                            <p><i>eurous</i> (Leech), p.203. </p>
      Hind wing below with three discal spots  .. .. ..   </p> <p><i>glycerion</i> (Gray),p. 204.</p>      
     
<p>3. Fore wing above with three dark cell-bars.. ..       <p><i>agetes</i> (westw), p.205.</p>
      Fore wing above with four broad dark red spots ...</p>  <p>4.</p> 
 
<p>4. Hind wing below with a discal row of red spots............ <p>5.</p>
      Hind wing below  without red discal                         <p>[p. 212.</p>
      spots. . ... . .. .</p>                             <p><i>antiphates</i> (Cram.),</p> 

<p>5. Fore wing above with a submarginal
      row of pale rounded spots.                 <p><i>nomius</i> (Esp.), p.207.</p>
      Fore wing above with a green submarginal chain-line- not spots</p> <p><i>aristus</i> (Cram.), p.210.</p>   
      
<p>B. EURYPYLUS Group.</p>

<p>1. Fore wing above without a submarginal
      row of green spots.  ....                            <p>2.</p> 
      Fore wing above with a submarginal
      row of green spots..</p>                             <p>3.</p>

<p>2.Tail long; fore wing above                             <p>[p.217.</p>
     transparent green                                   <p><i>cloanthus</i> (Westw.),</p>
     Tail very short; wings black with a green band..</p> <p><i>sarpedon</i> (Linn.),p.219.</p>
 
<p>3. Tail short; fore wing above with a                         <p>[p.229.</p>
      double cell-spot  ..........                           <p><i>agameninon</i> (Linn.),</p>
      Tail absent; fore wing above with a
      single cell-spot .. .. .. ..</p>                        <p>4.</p>

<p>4.Hind wing below with a basal costal
     dark bar not continued to the origin
     of vein 7; discal veins not black..                      <p>5.</p>
     Hind wing below with a basal costal
     dark bar not continued to the origin
     of vein 7; discal veins black..</p>                      <p>7.</p>
     
<p>5. Hind wing below with costal bar separated
      from basal dark band, the barred-          
      centred...   ..        ....             <p><i>doson</i>(Feld), p.221</p>
      Hind wing below with costal bar
      united to basal dark band;</p>                  <p>6.</p>
 
<p>6.Fore wing above with only one submarginal
     spot in area 1 <i>b</i>. Abdomen
     above black ...                         <p><i>evemon</i> (Bdv.), p.225.</p>
     Fore wing above with only two submarginal
     spots in area 1 <i>b</i>. Abdomen                   <p>[p. 225.</p>
     above whitish ...</p>                        <p><i>eurypylus</i> (Linn.),

<p>7.Hind wing above with cell pale below 
     with a black costal bar, the spot           <p>[p.227</p>
     internal to it pale yellow.. ... ...    <p> <i>bathycles</i> (Zink.),</p>
     Hind wing below  with cell dark and 
     with atwo green spots; below with           
    the coastal bar red-centred.. ... ...</p>    <p> <i>arycles</i> (Bdv.).</p>  p.228.        

<p>C. MACAREUS Group</p>

<p>1. Hind wing above with the discal streaks
      in areas 3 to 5 divided into small                     <p>[.237</p>
      spots.  ... ...                           <p><i>megarus</i> (Westw.),</i></p>   
      Hind wing above with the discal streaks
      in areas 3 to 5 not divided...</p>                 <p>2.</p>
 
<p>2. Hind wing below with a small yellow 
      tornal spot. Usually a dark bar in the
      cell formed by the continuation                       <p>[p.233</p>
      of vein 4...........                       <p><i>macareus</i> (Godt.),</p>
      Hind wing below with a very large 
      tornal spot. Rarely a dark bar in
      cell formed by continuation of vein 4.</p>    <p><i>xenocles</i>(Dbl.), p.235</p> 
      
<p>D. PAYENI Group.</p> 

<p>1. Underside with thae basal quarter dark
      chocolate-brown..  ... ...</p>                  <p><i>gyas</i>(Westw.), p.240.</p>
     
<p>2.  Underside with the basal area orange-
       yellow, brown-spotted........</p>              <p><i>payeni</i>(Bdv.), p.241.</p>  
       
<p><i>Antiphates Group</i>.</p>

<p>Fore wing with vein 11 running into vein 12. Wings white with black bands; hind wing below with a sub basal band parallel with the inner margin and a median band which approach one another at the apex of the cell or are connected there; tail long, gradually pointed. A well marked cottony scent-organ in the abdominal fold in <i>agetes, nomius</i>, and  <i>aristeus</i>. Six Indian species</p> 

<p><b>Graphium eurous</b> (Leech). (Fig. 54).</p>

<p> {\male} {\female}. Body above black, with long grey hairs. Fore wing semitransparent, with ten black bands and the base black; the first and second band, as well as the four outer partly united ones, usually reach the inner margin. Hind wing above with black anal area spotted with grey-blue and from which the black lines run out to the costa, at the anal angle a yellow double spot; hind wing below with to parallel oblique discal lines, between which a number of yellow spots are placed. Abdominal fold of {\male} without scent-wool.</p>

<p>Fig. 54.---<i>a, G. eurous sikkimica</i> (Heron); <i>b, G. eurous caschmirensis</i> (Roths): undersides of hind wings.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``Green dotted with black, the pronotum with yellow transverse band which is laterally continued to the anal segment, the three thoracic segments each with pair of black spines, anal process yellow with black tip, curved laterad'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--``Slender, green, with four yellow lines'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---The larva feeds on <i>Machilus odoratissima</i> Nees (family Laurace{\ae}). The butterfly is fond of resting on the tops of trees, round which it circles swiftly.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--West and Central China, Formosa, NORTHERN INDIA. Two subspecies are found in India.</p>

<p>58 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium eurous caschmirensis</b> (Rotheschild).(Fig. 54 <i>b</i>, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio glycerion caschmirensis</i>, Rotheschild, 1895, pp. 407, 408 (North Kashmir).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurous caschmirensis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 86; Rosen, 1929, p.14</p>

<p><i>Papilio caschmirensis</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 36, p1. 480, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-d</i> ({\male} {\female}, larva, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio mandarina caschmirensis</i>, Seitz, 1907, p. 15, t. 8 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa caschmirensis</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p. 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.53.</p>

<p><i>Papilio kaschmirensis</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 95, fig. 19. B; Hannyngton, 1910, p. 362.</p>

<p><i>Papilio glycerion</i>, Robson <i>(non Grey)</i>, 1895, p. 497 (larva, pupa); Mackinnon {amp; de nic\'evile, 1898, p. 595, p1.W, figs. 25<i>a-</i>25 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Fore wing above whiter than in <i>sikkimica</i>, the fourth bar in the cell from the base not reaching below the median vein, and the post-discal line does not reach vein 1. Hind wing with the yellow spots on both sides paler, and the two discal lines on the underside farther apart than in <i>sikkimica</i>.</p>

<p><i>Expance</i>: {\male} {\female}, 60-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---KASHMIR tO KUMAON; not rare.</p>

<p>58 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium eurous sikkimica</b> (Heron). (Fig. 54 <i>a</i>, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio sikkimica</i>, Heron, 1899, p. 120.</p>

<p><i>Papilio sikkimica</i>, Moore, 1903, p.35, pl. 479, figs. 2, 2 <i>a, b</i>({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio kaschmirensis</i> var, sikkimica, Bingham, 1907, p. 96, p1.14, fig. 96 ({\male})</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurous sikkimica</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 86; Rosen, 1929, p. 14.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa eurous sikkimica</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p.33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Fore wing above with the fourth transverse black band from the base crossing the cell and reaching beyond the median vein; the post-discal band reaches vein 1.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--SIKKIM to ASSAM; not rare.</p>

<p><b>Graphium glycerion</b> Gray.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Hind wing below at the costal margin and at the apex of the cell with a black-edged spot, which are united into an 8. Abdominal fold of {\male} without scent-wool.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---West and Central China to Yunnan, NEPAL, and UPPER BURMA. Occurs at higher elevations than <i>eurous</i>. Only the nominotypical form occurs in India.</p>

<p>59. <b>Graphium glycerion glycerion</b> (Gray).</p>

<p><i>Papilio glycerion</i>, Gray, 1831, p. 32; id., 1846, p. 6, p1. 3, fig. 2; Rothschild, 1895, p.407; Bingham, 1907, p. 95, fig. 19 A.</p>

<p><i>Pazala glycerion</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 33, p1. 479, fig. 1, 1<i>a</i>, 1<i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio glycerion glycerion</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 86, t. 40 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa glycerion</i>,Evan, 1927, p. 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53, p1. v, fig. A 5.2 ({\male})</p>

<p><i>Papilio paphus</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1886, p. 254, p1. ii, fig. 6 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dead-white or very pale cream-colour. Fore wing the cell partially and interspaces between the dusky black outer discal markings more or less semi-transparent; cell crossed by five black bands, the basal two reaching the inner margin, and the subapical one to a little below the median vein; a  black discocellular band, joined at costal margin and above lower angle of cell to the band traversing the cell near its apex; a broad transverse post-discal black band from near tornal angle to costa; thi. band, double above vein 5, forms three well-marked loops; submarginal and marginal narrower black bands, the former united with me post-discal band near tornal angle; the post-discal band outwardly, and the marginal band inwardly, broadly and diffusely bordered with dusky black. Hind wing with a narrow black line from base along inner margin; a broader black line along vein 1, joined below the cell by a broad black band that crosses the latter subbasally; a black patch on the anal area, bearing two conspicuous yellow tornal spots, below which there is a triangular white dorsal mark, and bearing also three somewhat obscure blue submarginal lunules; tail narrowly edged with white; a narrow black discal line from costa to median vein, crossing the cell near its apex, and at each end with loops formed of slender black lines, in the {\female} well marked, in the {\male} seen only by transparency from the underside; discal, post-discal, and submarginal slender black lines from the costa terminate in the black anal patch.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to above, the black markings more heavily defined; the anterior loop on the short median line is tinged with yellow; median vein and discocellulars broadly defined in black Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen black, with some white pubescence, the head anteriorly tufted with black; head thorax, and abdomen beneath whitish-yellow.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 65-75 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--SIKKIM to NORTHERN BURMA; not rare.</p>

<p><b>Graphium agetes</b> Westwood.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. White with black bands. Hind wing with black distal margin which bears some white spots, a red anal spot, slender tail which is black  tipped with white. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing a black subbasal band parallel with the inner margin, and with a black discal band bearing red spots; abdominal fold with a well-marked cottony scent-organ.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--Forquents wooded hills. The {\male}{\male} congregate at puddles and on the moist sand of river-banks.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-- NORTHERN INDIA to Sumatra and Borneo also in Hainan. Two subspecies are found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>60. <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium agetes agetes</b> (Westwood). (Fig. 53, venation).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agetes</i>, Westwood, 1843 <i>b</i>, p. 23, p1. 55, figs. 1, 2 ({\male}); Rotheschild, 1895, p.417; Bingham, 1907, p. 100, fig. 22(venation), p1. 14, fig. 95 ({\male}); Ollenbach, 1921, p. 895.</p>

<p><i>Deoris agetes</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 31, 31, p1. 478, figs 2, 2<i>a</i>,  2<i>b</i>, ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agetes agetes</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 87.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa agetes agetes,</i> Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p. 33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 53.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white. Fore wing with the cell crossed by three comparatively broad, oblique black bands, the inner most produced across areas 1 and 1 a to the inner margin, the  next to vein 1, sometimes a little beyond into area 1 a, the third to the median vein; these are follwed by a triangular costal black spot above the upper apex of cell; a post-discal oblique black band from costa to just above tornus, where it joins a broad black marginal edging which lies between apex and tornus; costa edged with a black thread which widens slightly beyond the post-discal band. The white ground-colour in the anterior half of cell, beyond the apex of the latter to the post-discal black band, and in the area between the post-discal and marginal bands, is hyaline with a greenish-yellow tinge. Hind wing with a tornal spot, the annal lobe, tail, and outer margin black; above the tornal spots a short, comparatively broad, red band edged anteriorly by a fine black line that joins the spot to the black on the anal lobe; a triangular submarginal white line in area 4; also the anterior edge of tail at base is touched with white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to above. Hind wing with two convergent transverse black bands, the outer one traversd by shot transverse lines of red in areas 2, 6, 7, and 8; these two bands coalesce above the tornal area.  Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black, the head marked with red, the thorax on the sides with greyish pubescence; abdomen with lateral white stripes; beneath white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>; {\male} {\female}, 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--SIKKIM to NORTHERN BURMA; not rare. Also occurs in Hainan, Tong-king, and Annam.</p>

<p>60. <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium agetes iponus</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agetes iponus</i>, Frushtorfer, 1902 <i>d</i>, p.58; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.87.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa agetus iponus</i>, Evans, 1927, p.33; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54, p1. v, fig. A 5.3 ({\male})</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Fore wing with the second black band from the base not reaching vein 1; the discal line meets the marginal line between veins 2 and 3. Hind wing above with no white submarginal line in areas 5 and 6.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--Habitat.--TAVOY and SOUTHERN BURMA; not rare. Extends to the whole of the Malay Peninsula.</p>

<p><b>Graphium nomius</b> (Esper).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}.Fore wing with four dark bars in the cell; anterior submarginal spots rounded. Beneath with the first and second brown bands blackish at the costal margin. Hind wing above with well-developed black discal band; abdominal fold with a well-marked cottony scent-organ.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.--``The full-grown larva above usually black with white transverse stripes, beneath green, the anterior and posterior segments yellowish, sometimes the larva entirely green; on each of the thoracic segments and the anal segment a pair of spines. On <i>Saccpetalum tomentosum</i> Hock. f., family Leguminos{\ae}, and <i>Polyalthia</i>  <i>longifolia</i> Benth. {amp; Hook f., family Anonace{\ae}'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--``Not on the food-plant, but under stones, in crevices, and under the roots of trees; earth-coloured, with short thoracic horn directed forwards, and somewhat produced angles to the head. Pupa stage lasts in S.India from July to March or May''(<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--Common in the lowlands, sometimes abundant in certain places. The males often congregate in crowds at puddles; they also visit flowers.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--CEYLON and SOUTHERN INDIA to SIKKIM, ASSAM, BURMA, Tong-king, Siam, Annam, and Haainan. Two subspecies known, both found in the Indian area.</p>

<p>61 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium nomius nomius</b>(Esper). (Fig. 55 <i>a, b</i>, imago); P1. I, fig. 22, larva, fig.23, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilip nomius</i>, Esper, 1785-98, p. 210, t.52, fig. 3; Davidson {amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 364, p1. E, fig. 1 (larva), fig. 1 <i>a</i> (pupa); Rothschild, 1895, pp.421-2; Bingham, 1907, pp. 101, 102, fig. 23 A, B.</p>

<p><i>Pathya nomius</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 142, p1. 62, fig. 2; id., 1903, p. 26, p1. 477, figs. 1, 1<i>a-</i> 1 <i>e</i> (larva, pupa, {\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilip nomius nomius</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 87.</p>

<p><i>Pathya nomius nomius</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 238, p1. 5, fig. A 5.4 ({\male}); id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54, p1. v, fig. a 5.4 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> bluish-white. Fore wing crossed by five broad black bands; the basal and subbasal bands reach the inner margin, the discal band is generally extended into area 2, the fourth band ends on the median vein, the fifth extends from the costaon both sides of the discocellulars and terminates at lower angle of cell; beyond the fifth band is a short macular transverse bar of the ground-colour that terminates on vein 5, followed by a very broad black marginal band that occupies about one-third of the width of the wing and is traversed by a submarginal series of small spots of the ground-colour, of which the anterior ones are rounded the others semilunate. Hind wing with the ground-colour whitish along the inner margin and above vein 7; a streak along the inner margi, a subbsal and an inner discal transverse band from costa across cell, and a very broad marginal band, black; the former two joined near the tornus transverse lunular black marks, the marginal band traversed by a series of slender whitish lunules; a small black spot in area 1 above tornus and another at base of area 4 the black at the apices of areas 2 to 4 and the lunules thereon suffused with grey: tail black, edged and tipped with white.</p>

<p>Fig. 55.---<i>G. nomius nomius</i> (Esp.)</p>

<p><i>a</i>, {\male}, upperside, <i>b</i>, anterior portion of hind wing underside.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> white, with the black markings similar to above but bronze-brown, with the following exceptions:-Fore wing with the parts of the basal, subbasal, and discal bands extended below the call black, also the inner portion below vein 4 of the marginal band. Hind wing with the inner discal band broken, irregular and black, and bordered by a series of red spots outwardly edged with black; the submarginal whitish lunules are broadly edged on the outer side with black; anal area ochraceous-grey. Antenn{\ae} black; head, thorax, and abdomen creamy-white, with a medial broad longitudinal stripe; beneath, the abdomen with lateral black stripes.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}. 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CEYLON, SOUTHERN INDIA to the SIKKIM lowlands; not rare.</p>

<p>61. <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium nomius swinhoei</b> (Moore). (Fig. 56 <i>a, b,</i> imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio swinhoei</i> Moore, 1878 <i>c</i>, p. 697 (Hainan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio nomius swinhoei</i>, Rotheschild, 1895, p. 422; Bingham, 1907, p.103, fig. 24 A, B; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 87. t. 41 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa nomius swinhoei</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54.</p>

<p><i>Papilio nomius</i> f. <i>pernomius</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 202, figs. 1, 2 (seasonal form) (Siam).</p>

<p><i>Pathysa pernomius</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 29, p1.478, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Differs from the nominotypical form as follows:- <i>Upperside</i>  with broader black markings. Fore wing with the fifth black band generally extended beyond the cell. Hind wing with much broader marginal black band, inwardly extended to and coalescent with the black lunules that connect the subbasal and discal bands; the grey anal patch absent of obsolescent.</p>

<p>Fig. 56.-- <i>G. nomius swinhoei</i> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>a</i>, underside; <i>b</i>, fore wing upperside, apical half.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the fourth black band brown below the cell. Hind wing with the precostal spur edged narrowly on the inner side by black; edging to the submarginal lunules better defined.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--ASSAM to SOUTHERN BURMA; not rare. Occurs also in Hainen, Tong-king, Annam, and Siam.</p>

<p><b>Graphium aristeus</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p>>{\male} {\female}.White, the <i>upperside</i> with black bands, the underside with brown bands. Fore wing with seven bands, of which the third to fifth are abbreviated and the fourth is sometimes absent; the fifth is commonly united with the sixth at the lower angle of cell, and the sixth and seventh form a broad marginal area enclosing a submarginal row of white spots. Hind wing with subbasal and median bands, which run parallel with the inner margin, the median band sometimes only indicated, the outer margin black with white submarginal spot, of which the posterior three or four are very thin and lunular.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing discal band bearing red spots, at tge distal side of which are placed black spots. Body beneath white, above black with light lateral stripe. Abdominal fold with a well a well-marked cottony scent-organ.</p>

<p>Fig. 57.--<i>G.aristeus anticrates</i> (Doub1.).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--Found in wooded districts at low elevations. The butterfly flies high and fast but sometimes congregates at puddles and on river-banks</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--NORTHERN INDIA to the Bismarck Islands and North Austrlia. Several subspecies are known,of which two  occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>62 <i>a</i>. <b>Grahium aristeus anticrates</b> (Doubleday). (Fig. 57, inago)</p>

<p><i>Papilio anticrates</i>, Doubleday, 1846 <i>a</i>, p. 371 (Sylhet); Gray \, 1852, p. 29, p1.3 fig. 3({\male}); Elwes, 1888, p. 434 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio aristeus anticrates</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 419; Bingham, 1907, p. 104, fig. 25; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 88, t. 41 a.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa anticrates</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 24,pl. 476, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-</i>  1 <i>c</i> ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Pathysa aristeus anticrates</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.54.</p>


<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> tinged with green in fresh specimens. Fore wing with the second (subbasal) band somewhat attenuate posteriorly; in the cell the fourth band subtriangular, sometimes not extended to the median vein; submarginal white spots in a chain, linear, the posterior ones more lunular. Hind wing with the discal black band obsolescent, only faintly defined near costa and at posterior end; a grey anal area as in <i>nomius</i>.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the black markings replaced by bronze=brown; the discal red spots are edged with black, and the outer edgings to the submarginal series of white lunules are prominently and broadly black.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 70-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--SIKKIM to ASSAM; rare.</p>

<p>62 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium artisteus hermocrates</b> (C. {amp; R. Felder).</p>

<p><i>Papilio hermocrates</i>, C.{amp; R. Felder, 1864 <i>a</i>, p. 302; id., 1864 <i>b</i>, p.57, t. 12, fig. E({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio artisteus hermocrates</i>,Rothschild, 1895, p. 420; Bingham 1907, p. 104; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.88. t. 41 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa hermocrates</i>, Moore, 1903, pp. 30-1.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa aristeus hermocrates</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 239; id., 1927, p.34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54.</p>

<p><i>Papilio artisteoides</i>, Eimer, 1889, p. 163, t. 3, fig. 3.</p>

<p><i>Papilio artisteus hermocrates</i> ab. <i>artisteoides</i>, Rothschild, 1895, pp. 420-1; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 88.</p>

<p><i>Papilio artisteus</i> var. <i>nigricans</i>, Eimer, 1889, p. 178, fig. R.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. the black bands are more extended than in <i>anticrates</i>. Fore wing with the fourth band narrowed posteriorly and ending on the median vein; the black marginal band very broad, covers more than the outer third of the wing, coalesces with the black band on the discocellulars, and encloses the short macular bar of ground-colour beyond the cell; the  submarginal spots linear. Hind wing as in <i>swinhoei</i>, but with grey anal patch as in typical <i>nomius</i>.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to <i>numius</i>, with wider markings as above. The precostal spur as in <i>numius</i>, and not as in <i>swinhoei</i>.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.-- Connected with <i>anticrates</i> by intermediate gradations. Specimens with narrow white discal area on fore wing are called <b>aristeoides</b> Eimer. Specimens in which the cell of fore wing bears only three white bands and the white submarginal band of fore wing and the white discal band of hind wing are posteriorly abbreviated are f. <b>nigicans</b> Eimer.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--BURMA; rare. Extends also to Siam and the Lesser Sunda Islands, Sumatra, Borneo, Palawan, and the Philippine Islands.</p>

<p><b>Graphium antiphates</b> (Cramer).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. White, the fore wing above and beneath greenish towards the costa, as also tha basal half of hind wing beneath; fore wing with seven black bands. Hind wing above with black marginal spots and a row of black submarginal spots; the posterior part of the marginal area dusted with grey-black, or the whole margin broadly  grey-black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with black markings as follows:- Before the inner margin a stripe which is anally united with a subbasal stripe; a double discal band longitudinally divided by the ground-colour, the distal half of which is broken up into spots; a row of submarginal spots, the former ones shaped like the figure 3, at their proximal side yellow patches, which  are for the most part indistinctly defined.Body above black with light lateral stripe, or the abdomen entirely white; underside white with black lateral stripe. Abdominal fold of ({\male}) without scent-wool.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i>.--Described under <i>naira</i> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--The males congregate in crowds at puddles and the edges of brooks, where they drink in company with Pierids. The females are taken singly in the woods. On the wing <i>antiphates</i> gives the impression of a Piriod, as the long tails are scarcely noticeble during its swift flight.</p>

<p><i>Distrbution</i>.-- China to CEYLON, NORTH BORNEO, and the Lesser Sunda Islands, Several subspecies are distinguished, of which four occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>63.<i>a</i>. <b>Graphium antiphates ceylonicus</b> (Eimer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates</i> var. <i>ceylonicus</i>, Eimer, 1889, p.149.</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates alcibiades</i> ab. <i>ceylonicus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 412; Bingham, 1907, p.99</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates ceylonicus</i>, Jordan, 1909<i>a</i>, p. 89.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa antiphates ceylonicus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240; id., 1927, p.34; 1932 <i>a</i>, p.54.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa antiphates</i>, Moore (non Cram.), 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 142, p1. 63, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Fore wing with the marginal band reaching vein, 1, the submarginal band reaching vein, 2, these two bands not united; subbasal band of uniform width and reaching inner margin; second band from the base extends to vein 1; hind wing above with no grey anal area.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 80-95 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--CEYLON; very rare.</p>    

<p>63 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium antiphates naira</b> (Moore). (Fig. 58, imago; P1. I, fig. 24, larva, fig. 25, pupa).</p>   

<p><i>Pathysa naira</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 22, p1.475, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male}) (S. India).</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates naira</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 89</p>

<p><i>Pathysa antiphates naira</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 250; id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54.</p> 

<p><i>Papilio antiphates</i>, Davudson, Bell, {amp; Aitken (non Cram.), 1897 <i>a</i>,p. 579, p1. 6 figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa); Bingham (non Cram.),1907, p. 97, fig. 20</p> 
	
<p><i>Wet-season form</i>.--{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with fore wing cell crossed by five short black bands, of which the basal extends to inner margin, the subbasal into area 1, the third and fourth to the edge of cell; the fifth band extends broadly on both sides of the discocellulars and terminates at the lower angle of cell; beyond these are broad post-discal and maginal black bands from costa to tornal angle; the two bands coalese below vein 4 and terminate in a point at the tornus; the white portion of the cell anteriorly between the latter and the margnal band. Hind wing with basal three-fourths uniform white, the black markings showing through from below; the discal fourth dark grey traversed by a curved irregular submarginal series of black lunules that ends in a black tornal spot, and a marginal black band that follows tthe indentations of the wing; the emargination below the black tornal spot edged wuth ochraceous; tail blackish-grey, edged and tipped with white.</p>

<p>Fig. 58.--- <i>G. antiphates naira</i> (Moore).</p> 

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing similar to above, but the green shading over the white portions in the basal half of cell more decided; discal and marginal black bands separate, not joined posteriorly, the formaer edged posteriorly on both sides by dark grey due to the black on the uppeside showing through. Hind wing with basal half green, distal half white; a large black tornal spot; a black line along inner margin that curves above tornal spot outwards to veins 2; a straight subbasal black band from costa across cell and ending on vein 2, where it joins the inner black line; a broader black band from costa across apex of cell extended into base of area 3; an irrgular discal series of black markings curved inwards posteriorly towards the tornal spot; a submarinal series of very small slender black lunules in pairs, the ground-colour on the inner side of these darkened to rich ochreous-yellow; a series of short marginal black bars; tail dusky black edged with white.</p>

<p><i>Dry-season-form</i>.--{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the black bands generally narrower and shorter; the basal band becomes faint posteriorly and barely touches the inner margin; subbasal band very short; post-discal and marginal bands coalesce at vein 4 and do not reach the ending in a point between veins 1 and 2. Hind wing white, with the chrome colouring showing through from below; the marginal black edging narrow, and the submarginal black lunules only just traceable.</p> 

<p><i>Variation</i>.-- The nominatypical form is that of the wet season. The typical dry form is rare, and the British Museum possesses only 2 {\male} {\male} and 1 {\female}.  ``From December until mid-March the butterfly passes through changes from an extreme dry-season form, in which the characteristic broad grey band is completely absent, through intermediate forms, in which the grey tornal area spreads and widens from the neighbourhood of the tail, until the full wet-season form arrives'' (Yates, 1930 <i>a</i>, p. 589).</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.--Surface covered with hardly perceptible semi-appressed white hairs. Colour a darkish transparent-looking olive-green, speckled thinly with white on the dorsum of segments 5 to 14, forming a while dorsal line and a darkish dorso-lateral line; a dark diagonal stripe on segments 5 to 11; a broad, spiracular, white-yellow band below which there is a deep green subspiracular one follwed by a whitish band bordered below by a green one; the flattened deep green dorsum of segments 3 and 4 is surrounded completrly anteriorly, laterally, and posteriorly by a yellow-white band, and the lateral parts of these segments are suffused with reddish-black. Length 40 mm.; width 9 mm. on segment 4 (from <i>Bell</i>, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--Bright green, with a yellow dorso-lateral line on segments 4 to 8, where it merges into the lateral line of abdomen; other markings brown, the ventral middle line of yellow. The body-string is unusually long. Length 30 mm.; width mm.; thoracic point 1 mm. long (from Bell, 1912).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--The egg is laid singly on the upperside of a fresH leaf or shoot. The larva feeds on <i>Unona lawii</i> Hook., a climbing shrub belonging to the Anonace{\ae}. In the last stage the larva never lies out in the sun; it is sluggish and walks with a halting motion. The butterfly is most plentiful in the monsoon months, and may be seen circling in graceful flight around the tops of trees in the evergreen jungle. During the hot hours it decends from the trees in search of water, its fondness for this being thus described by Yates:-``Its thrist appears to be considerable; once it has settled it is not easily driven away; thus it may settle among crowd of Pieriods which, on the appoarch of a human being with a net, rise and scatter, leaving <i>P. antiphates naira, </i>, which remains unmoved, greedily sucking moisure, an easy prey'' (Journ. Bomb. Nat. Hist. Soc. xxxiv, 1931).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---PENINSULAR INDIA; fairly common in the wet season, the {\female} rare.</p> 

<p>63 <i>c</i>. <b>Graphium antiphates pompilius</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p><i>Papilio pompilius</i>,Fabricius, 1787, p. 8.</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates pompilius</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 89.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa antiphates pompilius</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240, p. 240, p1. 5, fig. A 5.6 ({\male}); id., 1927, p.34; id., 1932<i>a</i>, p.54, p1. v, fig. A 5.6 {\male}).</p> 

<p><i>Papilio nebulosus</i>, Butler, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 33, p1. 4, fig. 3.</p>

<p><i>Papilio alcibiades</i> ab. <i>nebulosus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p.412.</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates</i> ab.<i>nebulosus</i>, Bingham, 1907, pp. 97, 99; Jordan, 1909<i>a</i>, p. 89, t. 40 <i>d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates continentalis</i>, Eimer, 1889, p. 137.</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates alcibiades</i> ab. <i>continentalis</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 412.</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates alcibiades</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Fabr.), 1907, p. 99.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. All the black markings shorter and narrower. Fore wing with the second band from base reaching vein 1; the post-discal and marginal bands usually separate, but if the former extends below vein 2 it unites with the marginal band; the marginal band does not reach the inner margin. Hind wing with the grey anal area reduced to a small patch of grey at the apices of areas 2 to 4; submarginal black markings rarely anteriorly, generally confined to the limits of the grey patch. Very variable.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.--- The rare melanic form <b>nebulosus</b> But1. occurs in Northern India. In this the fore wing above and beneath and underside of hind wing, as well as distal margin of hind wing above, are more of less completely dusted with black, with the exception of the greenish-white bands in the anterior part of fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--SIKKIM to BURMA, common; also occurring in Hainan, Annam, and Siam.</p>

<p>63 <i>d</i>. <b>Grahium antiphates epaminondas</b> (Oberth\dd{u}r). (Fig. 59, imago)</p>

<p><i>Papilio epaminondas</i>, Oberth\dd{u}r, 1879, p. 62, p1. 4, fig. 1 (Andamans); Staudinger {amp; Schatz, 1886, p. t. 6.({\male}); Eimer, 1889, p.121, t. 2, fig 6; Rothschild, 1895, p. 414; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 90, t. 40 <i>d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Pathysa epaminondas</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 23, p1. 475, figs. 2, 2 <i>a, b</i> ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio antiphates epaminondas</i>, Bingham, 1907, p. 97. fig. 21</p>

<p><i>Pathysa antiphates epaminondas</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240; id., 1927. p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54.</p>

<p><i>Papilio l{\ae}strygonum</i>, Wood-Mason, 1880, pp. 102, 178, p1. 6, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, ({\male}); Wood-Mason {amp; de nic\'eville, 1881 <i>b</i>, p. 253 ({\female}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Larger than most specimens occurring on the mainland, and the black markings, especially on the upperside, much wider. Fore wing with broad basal and subbasal bands which reach the inner margin. Hind wing the black markings of the underside partially represented by black scaling; marginal dark grey area wider than in other forms, with a tendency to turn to dusky black anteriorly, so that the submarginal black lunles are obscured anteriorly.</p> 

<p>Fig. 59.---<i>G. antiphates epaminondas</i> (Oberth).</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with the yellow patches more sharply defined than in the other races, light submarginal spots and also the ground-colour at the distal side of the discal band and inside it white.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ANDAMAN ISLANDS; not rare.</p>

<p><i>Eurypylus</i> Group.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Black, with green (or yellowish) markings which are scaleless. Hind wing below with red or yellow discal spots from the apex of cell to the anal angle, or at least traces of such spots, and usually one or two red or yellow subbasal spots, which are never absent even when the red discal spots are suppressed. Tail, when present, short and obtuse. Scent- fold in the {\male} rather broad, with a well-marked elongate tuft of scent-hairs. Body above dark, with a light stripe at each side.</p>

<p>Freshly emerged specimens and those killed too soon have the markings whitish or yellowish instead of green ; decayed, as well as worn specimens, are likewise yellowish. The normally red spots on the hind wing below are sometimes replaced by yellow ones.</p>

<p>This group in the Indian area comprises eight species.</p> 

<p><b>Graphuim cloanthus</b> (Westwood).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Black, with green bands. Fore wing with two large cell-patches and a broad discal band, which is continued on the hind wing in the form of a triangle; hind wing also with four submarginal patches.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with a red line at the base and small red linear spots from end of cell to anal angle.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``Widest at the 5th segment. The ridge over the head is furnished with two turbercles, black in front, white posteriorly. The 5th segment has a yellow bar which projects on each side beyond the body and has the appearance of a yoke. The points of the yoke are black. Colour green. The  13th segment is of a pale transparent blue-green. A pale yellow subdorsal line and an almost white spiracular line are the only markings. Head of a greenish-yellow. Legs claspers, and abdomen of the same colour as the 13th segment. The 13th segment ends in two sharp points which join at the end, so the division between them is visible only on a close examination'' (<i>Robson</i>, 1895).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--Bright green, with yellow carin{\ae}.</p> 

<p><i>Habits</i>.--Occurs throughout the summer. The spring specimens have larger green markings. Larva on <i>Machilus odoratissima</i> Nees, family Laurace{\ae}. The butterfly flies with a dancing motion round the tops of trees; its flight is very rapid. The {\male} comes down to drink at wet sand, keeping the wings closed.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-- Formosa and China to NORTHERN INDIA; also in Sumatra. Only the nominotypical form is found in the India area.</p>

<p>64 <b>Graphium cloanthus cloanhus</b> (Westwood).</p>

<p><i>Papilio colanthus</i>, Westwood, 1841, p. 42, 11, fig, 2; Staudinger {amp; Schatz, 1884, p.9, t. 6 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 445; Robson, 1895, p.497 (larva) Mackinnon {amp; de Nicl'evile, 1898, p. 595, p1. W. figs 27 <i>a-</i> 27 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa); Bingham, 1907, pp. 110-11, p1. 14, fig. 97 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Dalchina cloanthus</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 473, figs 1, 1<i>a-</i> 1<i>c</i> (larva, pupa,{\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio cloanthus cloanthus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 94.</p>

<p><i>Zetides cloanthus cloanthus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 24, p1 5, fig. A 6.1 ({\male}); id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. p1.v, fig. A 6.1 ({\male}) </p>

<p><i>Papilio cloanthus</i> f. <i>cloanthus</i>, Frushtorfer, 1902  <i>e</i>, p. 168; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 94.</p>

<p>({\male} {\female}). <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with costal margin up to a line through anterior half of cell to apex of wing and the outer margin broadly black; discal area pale green, interrupted anteriorly by the following irregular black bands that join the black on the costa to the marginal black: a band across middle of cell and along vein 4, another at apex of cell and along vein 5, and two shorter and more oblique ones nearer apex of wing; the hyaline spot left close to apex much smaller than those below; a pale submarginal, somewhat obscure broad line. Hind wing with an even costal black, and joined below to a very broad black marginal band; the remaining triangular middle area and a submarginal series of large spots pale green; inner margin with long soft pale hairs and touches of grey scaling on the tornal area.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with a series of slender crimson marking at the base along vein 1, broadened at tornus and in areas 2 to 5; admarginal white slender lines at tornal angle and in areas 2 and 3. Antenn{\ae}, head thorax, and abdomen dark brownish-black, thorax with lateral dark grey pubescence; underside of palpi, thorax, and abdomen touched with dingy white, the abdomen with three lateral whitish stripes.{\male} hind wing with the fold grey on the inside and fringed with a brush of long white hairs.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 85-95 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.--The wet-season form is called <b>cloanthulus</b> Fruhst., and is larger, with more extended black areas.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--KASHMIR to BURMA; not rare.</p>

<p><b>Graphuim sarpedon</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> brownish-black, with a green of greenish-blue discal band; fore wing with the band anteriorly strongly narrowed and separated into spots, on the hind wing narrowed posteriorly and ending in a point on vein 2 near the anal angle; hind wing the costal part of the band scaled with white, as also partly the veins intersecting the band;  a row of green submarginal lunules; scent-fold grey on the inside, furnished with a tuft of long, somewhat stiff white hairs; {\female} paler, with slightly broader wings.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with paler ground-colour, the discal band scaled with transparent whitish. Fore wing with slight indications of submarginal spots before the tornus. Hind wing near base with a red transverse bar, which extends from the costal margin to the cell and is separated from the discal band; five red discal spots, of which the anterior one encircles the apex of the cell. Body above brownish-black with dark grey hairs beneath for the most part grey-white.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.--``The young larva is black or dark green with numerous spines, of which those on the metathorax are long and bristly; when full-grown green , beneath lighter, with a pair of short spines on each of the three thoracic segments and on the last segment; on the metathorax a yellow transverse band, and from the metathorax to the anal segment a yellowish stripe above the legs'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--``Green, the thoracic horn slenderer, more pointed, and straighter than in the allied species, the lateral ridges extending straight downwards from the horn, between this carina and the frontal one a very slight, somewhat curved vertical ridge'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p> 

<p>For more detailed descriptions of larva and pupa see <i>Bell</i> (1911).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--The larva feeds on various Laurace{\ae} such as <i>Machilus odoratissisma</i> Nees, <i>Cinnamomum, Alseodaphne, Lits{\ae}a</i>, and especially <i>Camphora officinalis</i> Steud. where this tree has been imported. It lies in the centre of a leaf on the upper surface, is very sluggish, and does not wander far to pupate. The butterfly occurs in wooded districts and is very common in gardens and woods. It flies very rapidly round the tops of trees and frequents  flowers. The males also congregate in large numbers at wet and damp places. It occurs up to 7,000 feet, but is more common in the lower hills.</p> 

<p><i>Distribution</i>.-- South Japan and China as far as the Solomon Islands in numerous geographical forms. Two subspecies occur in the India area, where it is absent from Andaman and Nicobar Islands.</p>

<p>65 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium sarpedon teredon</b> (C.{amp; R. Felder).</p>

<p><i>Papilio teredon</i>, C.{amp; R. Felder, 1884 <i>a</i>, p. 305; Bell, 1911, p. 1116, p1. D 5, figs. 30 ({\male}), 30 <i>a</i> ({\female}), p1. C, fig . 16 (larva), p1. 1. fig 13 <i>a</i> (pupa).</p>

<p><i>Dalchina teredon</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 143, p1. 62, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1<i>b</i> (larva, pupa, imago); id., 1903, p. 14, p1. 472, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-</i> 1 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa,{\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio sarpedon teredon</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 442; Bingham, 1907, p. 112, p1. 15, fig. 98 ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 95, t. 45 <i>a</i> </p>

<p><i>Zetides sarpedon teredon</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240; id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Dalchina thermodusa</i>, Swinhoe, 1885 <i>a</i>, p. 146.</p>

<p><i>Papilio sarpedon teredon</i> ab. <i>thermodusa</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 442.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Distinguished from the nominotypical form by the narrower discal band on both wings. Fore wing with the discal band anteriorly yellowish-green and posteriorly bluish-green. Hind wing more produced posteriorly at apex of vein 4, where it forms a strong tooth; median vein black where it crosses the discal band.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 80-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---On the fore wing the spot near the apex is sometimes absent. This form was named <b>thermodusa</b> Swinhoe.</p>

<p><i>Habiitat</i>.--CEYLON and PENINSULAR INDIA; common.</p>

<p>65 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium sarpedon sarpedon</b> (Linn{\ae}us). (Fig. 60, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio sarpedon</i>,Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 461; Horsfield {amp; Moore, 1857, p.113, p1. 3, figs 8, 8<i>a</i> (larva, pupa); de Nic\'eville, 1892, p.54, p1, L, fig.11 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, pp. 440-1; de Nic\'eville, 1896, p. 186, p1, T, fig. 46 (dark aberr. of {\male}, Sikkim); Mackinnon {amp;de Nic\'eville, 1898, p1. W, fig. 26 <i>a, b</i> (pupa); Bingham, 1907, pp. 111-12, fig. 27; Kershaw, 1907, p. 113, p1. 13, fig. 5; Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896.</p>

<p><i>Dolchina sarpedon</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 12, p1. 471, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-</i> 1 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa, {\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio sarpedon sarpedon</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 95, t. 44 <i>d</i>; Rosan, 1929, p.15.</p>

<p><i>Cosmodesmus sarpedon</i>, Wileman, 1914, pp. 252-5, p1. 1, figs. 5, 6 (larva), 7(pupa).</p>

<p><i>Zetides sarpedon, sarpedon</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240, p1. 5, fig. A. 6.2 ({\male}); id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55, p1. v, fig. A 6.2 ({\male})</p>

<p><i>Papilio sarpedon</i> f. <i>melas</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1907 <i>e</i>, p. 183 (Tong-king, Tenasserim); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 75.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Discal bands broader than in the preceding race, and of uniform green. Hind wing with the median vein mostly white where it crosses the discal band; tail shorter.</p>

<p><i>Variaton</i>.-- In the northern districts a spring and summer form occurs. In the broad-banded spring form veins 1 to 3 are more or less white where they cross the discal band. In the summer form, called <b>melas</b> Fruhst., the band is narrower and the veins are black.</p>

<p>A. dark aberration of the {\male} from Sikkim is figured and described by de Nic\'eville (1896). The discal band of fore wing above is reduced to the anterior and posterior spots; the posterior spot is represented by an irregular small irroarted patch of blue scales heavily oversprinkled with black scales.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--KASHMIR to BURMA; common. Also on Hainan, and extending to Tong-king, the Philippines, and Lombok.</p>

<p>Fig. 60.--<i>G. sarpedon sarpedon</i> (Linn.).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> white, with green or greyish-white markings which are scaleless for the most part. Fore wing with five cell-spots, of which the basal one is streak-like and the fourth comma-shaped; a posteriorly widened discal macular band, a row of submarginal spots, and a single subcostal spot between the submarginal and discal spot. Hind wing with a discal elongate-triangular band, which is anteriorly divided by a short, narrow black band; a submarginal row of spots; {\male} with yellow scent-wool which reaches to the inner marginal stripe.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> markings mostly larger and silver-scaled. Hind wing with red (rarely yellow) markings; a spot before the costa in the short black costal band, this band never united with the black subbasal stripe; a row of spots from apex of cell to inner margin, of which the posterior one is usually produced basad into a long stripe. {\female} paler, with smaller markings.</p>

<p>Body above black, with bluish-grey hairs, abdomen with white lateral line, white below.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.--``Black or green, the spines of the mesonotum absent and those of the third pair reduced to tubercles'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p> 

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--``Varies in colour according to its environment; angles of the head distinctly projecting, thoracic horn bent forwards, gradually pointed, the tip itself rounded, the carin({\ae} of the horn sharp and straight'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p> 

<p><i>>Habit</i>.--Common in wooded distric, especially near river-beds. The males congregate in crowds at wet and moist places, in company with other butterflies. Occurs throughtout the summer. Larava feeds on <i>Cinnamomum, Polyalthia</i>, and other Annonace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--South Japan to South China and CEYLON, southwards and eastwards to the Sunda Islands. Several subspecies are known, of which three occur in the Indain area.</p>

<p>66 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium doson doson</b> (C amp; R. Felder).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doson</i>, C amp; R. Felder, 1864 <i>a</i>, p. 305.</p>

<p><i>Zetides doson</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 145, p1. 61, fig. 3.</p>

<p><i>Papilio doson doson</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 96-7, t. 43 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Zetides doson doson</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240; id., 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Papilio jason</i>, Esper (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1785-1801, t. 58, fig. 5 (=fig. typ).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black. Fore wing with three slender,oblique, short, pale green streaks in basal half of cell and two irregular, small, similarly-coloured spots that gradually diminish in size anteriorly, the spot in area 5 the smallest, those in 6 and 7 slightly larger; a spot at the base of area 7 and a sinuous complete submarginal series. Hind wing discal band reaching area 2 posteriorly, anteriorly white; a sinuous submarginal series of small pale green spots as on the fore wing; the subbasal costal stripe indistnct, not united with discal band, the latter interrupted by a black vein-streak at lower angle.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> brownish-fulvous black; markings similar, larger, their edges diffuse and all of a silvery-white, slightly tinted with pale green, Hind wing with a white basal streak that extends half-way down the inner margin; anther shoter white subbasal streak from costa to vein 7, coalescent with the white of the discal band n the cell, the streak of ground-colour that lies between this subbasal streak and the discal band jet-black,interrupted where it crosses vein 8 by a crimson spot; quadrate black spots near apex of cell and at bases of areas 1 to 3, all outwardly margined with crimson.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}. 70-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>; CEYLON; common.</p>

<p>66 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphuim doson eleius</b> (Fruhstorfer). (P1. I, fig. 20, larva, fig. 21, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doson eleius</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>a</i>, p. 209 (Malabar); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 97.</p>

<p><i>Zetides doson eleius</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240; id., 1927,p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 54.</p>

<p><i>Papilio doson</i>, Davidson {amp; Aitken (<i>non</i> Feld.). 1890, p. 364, E, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> (larva, pupa).</p>

<p><i>Papilio jason</i>, Bingham  (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1907, pp. 106-7 p1. 14. fig 96 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Differs only slightly from the nominotypical form from Ceylon. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with green spots in the apical half somewhat more yellowish; discal band somewhat broader; subbasal green line prominent. Hind wing with the median vein less black on the inner part of discal band.</p>

<p<i>Larva</i>.--``Very like that of <i>G. agamemnon</i> (Linn.), but the second pair of spines is entirly wanting and the third pair, which in <i>agamemnon</i> is rather long, curved, and sharp, is reduced in this species to more knobs encircled with a black ring. The colour is generally black or smoky until the last moult and then dull green, inclining to rusty brown on the sides, but some of our specimens remained quite black to the end'' (<i>Davidson {amp; Aitken</i>, 1890).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.--``The distinguishing mark of the pupa is again in the frontal horn, which is straight as in <i>agamemnon</i>, but directed forward instead of being almost erect. Its colour is normally green but varies with that of the object to which it is attached'' (<i>Davidson {amp; Aitken</i>, 1890).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---``Not so abundant in Coorg as <i>teredon</i>, but still very common. Habits similar to those of <i>teredon</i>; often settles on mud among <i>teredon</i>, also in serried rows separately'' (<i>Yates</i>, 1931).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTHERN INDIA to BENGAL; common.</p>

<p>66 <i>c</i>. <b>Graphium doson axion</b> (C. amp; R. Felder). (Fig. 61, genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio axion</i>,(C. amp; R. Felder), 1864 <i>a</i>, p. 305; Gosse, 1883, p. 311, p1. xxx, fig. 20(genitalia).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurypylus axion</i>, Rothschild, 1895, pp. 433-4; Bingham, 1907, p. 107.</p>

<p><i>Zetides axion</i>, Moore, 1903, p, 4, p1. 468, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-</i>1 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa, {\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio doson axion</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. t. 43 <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Zetides doson axion</i>, Evans, 1927, p. 34; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55, p1. v, fig. A 6.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Zetides eurypylus</i>, H\dd{u}bner (<i>non</i> Linn.), 1806-19, t. 107, figs. 1, 2.</p>

<p><i>Papilio acheron</i>, Moore, 1885, p. 120 (N. Bengal).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurypylus</i> ab. <i>acheron</i>, Rothschild, 1885, p. 434.</p>

<p><i>Papilio doson</i> f. <i>acheron</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 97.</p>

<p><i>Papilio jason pr{\ae}stabilis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 170 (Tong-king, Hong Kong).</p>

<p><i>Papilio axion</i> f. <i>pr{\ae}stabilis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 97, t. 43 <i>c</i> ({\male} underside).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female} Differs from the nominotypical from in the broader discal band; all the spots and markings of pale green and white conspicuously larger, especially in the spring broods. Fore wing the second submarginal spot in area 1 nearly always present. Hind wing with the costal bar separate from basal dark band.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of hind wing with the red spots more conspicuous, a red line along the posterior part of inner margin; in most specimens the short subbasal narrow band of white that runs from the costa to vein 7 does not coalesce with the white of the discal band where it crosses the cell.</p>

<p>Fig. 61.--<i>G.doson axion</i> (Feld.), valve and harpe,</p>
<p>(After Gosse).</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.---Harpe (fig. 61) a broad thin plate which closely lines the greater part of the value-cavity; its edge is well sclerotized and on the ventral side furnished with two ling, tapering, curved, acute spines, much resembling the prickles of a rose, both curved basad; dorsal edge produced to a thin sclerotized wall cut into three or four small and irregular teeth (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883).</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---The spring brood form <b>acheron</b> Moore, is small the discal band broad, and the submarginal spots below are large; this form hibernated pup{\ae}, is most strongly pronounced in the mountain districts of Northern India.</p>

<p>The summer brood form <b>pr{\ae}stabilis</b> Fruhst., has smaller submarginal spots on the under surface. <i>Upperside</i> with vein 1 of fore wing and median of hind wing less black where they cross the discal band.</p>

<p>The spots of the hind wing below are sometimes yellow instead of red.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---KUMAON to BURMA; common Also occurs in South China, Hainan, Tong-king, Siam, Annam, and Cochin-China.</p>

<p><b>Graphium evemon</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Resembles <i>eurypylus</i> Linn., but has distinctly different genitalia, the harpe having a long and more basally placed ventral process. The {\male} scent-wool forms a narrow stripe hidden in the fold. The abdomen above never dusted with white in large males. Fore wing above with the last submarginal spot absent or vestigal.</p>

<p><i>Habit</i>.---The butterfly congregates with the allied species at wet or damp places. When such a swarm is disturbed, the butterflies fly up and down the forest paths one behind the other, like <i>Catopsilia</i>.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--ASSAM and Tong-king to Java, Nias, and Borneo. Two subspecies in the Indian area.</p>

<p>67 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium evemon aibociliatis</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio evemon albociliatis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1901 <i>a</i>, p. 106; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 97-8.</p>

<p><i>Zetides evemon albociliatis</i>, Evans, 1920, p. 88; id., 1923, p. 240; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Disinguished from the <i>eurypylus</i> inhabiting the same locality by the underside markings. Fore wing with the last submarginal spot absent, hind wing with the costal bar centred with red as in <i>eurypylus</i>. Fore wing above with a spot near the base of area 5. Hind wing with narrow scent-stripe. Spring specimens have a broader discal band and beneath larger submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ASSAM to TAVOY; rare. Found also in Tong-king.</p>

<p>67. <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium evemon orthia</b> (Jordan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio evemon orthia</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>>a</i>, p. 88 (Malay Peninsula).</p>

<p><i>Zetides evemon orthia</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 240; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i> p. 55.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Similar to the summer specimens of the preceding race, but much smaller. Fore wing without a spot near base of area 5. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing without a red costal spot. Submarginal spots of both wings much larger beneath than above.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--MERGUI ARCHIPELA go to SOUTHERN BURMA; rare. Extends to Penang , the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Banka, and Borneo.</p>

<p><b>Graphium eurypylus</b> (Linn{\ae}us).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Very closely resembles <i>Feld.  Underside</i> of hind wing with the short dark costal band, which bears the red spot, united posteriorly with the dark subbasal band; in <i>doson</i> it terminates inside the silver band. In specimens where the bands are not the united the basal of the silver band is notched at the subcostal vein. The yellow scent-wool of the {\male} forms a broad patch, as in <i>dosan</i>, which extends to the black band parallel with inner margin.</p>

<p>``The harpe (on the inner side of the anal claspers) is distally narrower than in <i>doson</i> and bears longer processes'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909).</p>

<p><i>Larva</i> and  <i>pupa</i> very similar to <i>doson</i>. The larva at first black or brown, in the middle stages brown, yellowish, reddish or green, and when full-grown dark green. On Annonace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--The same habits as <i>doson</i>, with which it flies together in India.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--EASTERN INDIA to Malay Peninsula, Hainan, and Tong-king; the Greater and Lesser Sunda Islands, Philippines, Celebes, Moluccas, the whole Papuan region, Bismarck Islands, and Australia.</p>

<p>68 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium eurypylus cheronus</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurypylus acheron</i> f. <i>cheronus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 204.</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurypylus cheronus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 98; Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896.</p>

<p><i>Zetides eurypylus cheronus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55.</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurypylus cheronus</i>, f. <i>petina</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 98.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season from</i>.--{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of hind wing with the green band incised at the anterior and posterior margins of the cell. <i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the two submarginal spots in area 7 united, but sometimes separated by a thin brownish streak; subapical spot well developed; hind wing without a pale spot in the base of area 3. Abdomen for the most part dusted with white. </p>

<p><i>Dry-season- form</i> <b>petina</b> Jord.----Smaller, discal bands broader, submarginal spots below very much larger.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 75-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM to BURMA; not rare. Also extended to Hainan, Tong-king, and Siam.</p>

<p>68 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphuim eurypylus macronius</b> (Jordan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio eurypylus macronius</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 98 (Andaman).</p>

<p><i>Zetides eurypylus macronius</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 55</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Larger than the preceding race, abdomen for the most part white. Discal bands broad, that of the hind wing dusted with white, at anterior and posterior margins of cell not or only feebly incised; submarginal spots small, the last on the fore wing and the first on the hind wing usually only indicated.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with the two spots in area 1 separated. Hind wing with the red spots entirely or almost entirely without white edging; a pale spot in the base of area 3.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--ANDAMAN ISLANDS; rare.</p>

<p><b>Grapium bathycles</b> (Zinken-Sommer). (Fig. 62 <i>a-e</i>, genitalia).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black with pale green markings. Fore wing with five cell-spots, a posteriorly much widened discal band, a raw of submarginal spots, and a single spot in area 7 at the proximal side of the submarginal spot. Hind wing with two large white costal patches, an oblong spot in area 6 near cell, a long spot in the cell and one in area 2, row of submarginal spots.</p>

<p>Fig. 62.--<i>G.bathycles</i> (Zink.); genitaila. (After Gosse).</p>

<p><i>a</i>, valve and harpe; <i>b</i>, harpe; <i>c</i>, scaphium, vertical view; <i>d</i>, lateral view of genitaila; <i>c</i>, {\ae}deagus, lateral view of tip.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with the spots silvery-white, at base of hind wing often yellowish; cell-spots of fore wing and submarginal spots of hind wing larger than above. Hind wing with the brownish-black costal margin of cell prolonged to the costal margin in the form of a narrow, curved band; inside this band before the costa usually a yellow spot; a row of yellow discal spot. {\male} without scent-wool in the fold. Body above black, with ashy-grey hairs at sides of head and thorax; beneath grey-white, abdomen laterally with a grey-white stripe.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.--Harpe (fig.62 <i>a, b</i>) a broad segment of a sphere, the margins thickened, and dividing anteriorly into two strongly sclerotized processes, each of which, the dorsal especially, is studded with short, stiff blunt teeth; dorsal edge with a short, conical process (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883, p. 313, p1 xxxi, figs. 1-5).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.--Frequents wooded districts of the lowlands and hills, the males often in large numbers at wayside puddles and on sandy river-banks.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--NORTHERN INDIA to the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Borneo, Java, and Palawan. Only one subspecies occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>69. <b>Graphium bathycles chiron</b> (Wallace).</p>

<p><i>Papilio chiron</i>, Wallace, 1865, p. 66 (nota); Moore, 1865 <i>b</i>, p.757.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bathycles chiron</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 438; Bingham, 1907, p.108; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 100; Ollenbach, 1921, p.896.</p>

<p><i>Zetides bathycles chiron</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56.</p>

<p><i>Papilio bathycles chiron</i>  f. vern. <i>ligyra</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i> p. 100.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. The hind wing bears, at least beneath, always a white stripe behind the cell.</p>

<p>The nominotypical <i>wet-season</i> form is large, with smaller light patches.</p>

<p>The <i>dry-season form</i>  <b>ligyra</b> Jord., has the discal spots, and beneath the submarginal ones, large; fore wing with veins 2 and 3 narrowly black; hind wing with a small discal spot in area 2.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}. 75-100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.--SIKKIM to BURMA; not rare. Occurs also in Tong-king and Annam.</p>

<p><b>Graphium arycles</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> with pale green patches. Fore wing with an indistinct basal band, a subbasal band, three transverse spots and a smaller apical spot in area 7 an isolated discal spot. Hind wing with a tripartite subbasal band parallel with inner margin; a discal row of four spots, of which the first is large and white; a submarginal row of six spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> patches with silvery scaling. Hind wing with a small costal spot between the subbasal band and the large costal discal spot. three red spots between vein 4 and anal angle.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---The SHAN STATES and Siam to Java and Palawan. Not much subject to variation. and only two subspecies distinguished.</p>

<p>70. <b>Graphium arycles arycles</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p><i>Papilio arycles</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 231; Distant, 1885, p. 362, p1. 32, fig. 5; Rothschild, 1895, p. 446 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Zetides arycles</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 11</p> 

<p><i>Papilio arycles,arycles</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 102, t.45 <i>c, d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Zetides arycles</i>, Evans, 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56.</p>  

<p><i>{\male} {\female}</i>. The large central costal spot of the hind wingis always somewhat longer than broad. Other characters as already described.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 70-80 mm</p>.

<p><i>Habitat.---ASSAM to SOUTHERN BURMA; rare Extends to the Malay Peninsula, Sumatra, Java, Banka, Borneo, and Palawan</i>.</p>

<p><b>Graphium agamemnon</b> (Linn{\ae}us). Fig. 63 <i>a-c, genitalia)</i>.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female} <i>Upperside</i> brownish-black with blue-green patches, of which those placed towards the base are band-like and those below the cell of the fore wing large and elliptical. Hind wing with tail, which is longer in the {\female}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> paler, the green patches partly covered with white or brownish scales, both wings clouded with violet-grey. Hind wing with a black crescent, basally margined with red between vein 8 and cell; beneath this spot usually a distinct second are; often a red anal spot and sometimes a row of red discal spots. Body brown-black above, beneath grey, with a grey-green lateral stripe.</p>

<p><i>Genitalia</i>.--Harpe (fig. 63 a) a broad saucer-like plate with thickened edges and slightly free; dorsal edge produced to a tooth-like lobe of somewhat rounded triangular form, its edge not serrate (<i>Gosse</i>, 1883).</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``The young larva almost black, with a large ligjt area on the anal segment each with a pair of processes with forked hair, the other segments likewise with some forked hairs arranged in longitudinal rows; these hairs disappear later. The full-grown larva either ochre-yellow, with greenish- tinge, or dark green; larva{\ae} bred indoors sometimes light yellow; the thoracic segments each with a pair of black spines, the spines of the third pair in a small orange-yellow spot; the anal spines light with dark tips'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.---``Thoracic horn laterally compressed, others when veiwed from the side, bent forwards and about twice as long as broad, the tip and the lateral carina brown, the latter undulate; behind the stigma of the prothorax a short brown ridge'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---The larva feeds on trees belonging to the Anonace{\ae} as <i>Anona, Saccopetalum, Gualteria, Polyalthia</i>, and <i>Michelia</i>. It prefers young trees or bushes, and remains by day motionless on the midrib of a leaf. The butterfly is very common in woods, plains, and hills, and is fond of visiting the flowers of <i>Lantana</i>. The females are more usually taken when ovipositing.</p>

<p>Fig. 63.--<i>G. agamemnon</i>(Linn.), genitalia. (After Gosse).</p>

<p><i>a</i>, valve and harpe; <i>b</i>. lateral view of uncus, scaphium, and {\ae}deagus; <i>c</i>, uncus, vertical view.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---South China and NORTHERN INDIA to Queensland, the Solomon Islands, and Bismarck Islands. A number of geographical races are known, of which five occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>71. <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium agamemnon agamemnon</b> (Linn{\ae}us). (Fig. 64, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agamemnon</i>, Linn{\ae}us, 1758, p. 462; Horsfield {amp; Moore, 1857, p. 114, p1. 3, figs. 9 (larva), 9 <i>a</i> (pupa); Gosse, 1883, pp. 314, 317, p1. xxxi, figs. 6-8 (genitaila); Staudinger {amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 9, t. 6 ({\male}); Distant 1885, p. 363, p1. 32, fig. 7; Davidson {amp; Aitken, 1890, p. 363, (early stages); Rothschild, 1895, pp. 447-50; Bingham, 1907, pp. 108-10, fig.26; Bell, 1911, p. 1117, p1. D. 5, fig. 29 ({\male});</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 7, p1, 470, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-</i> 1 <i>c</i> (larva, pupa,{\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agamemnon agamemnon</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>. 101, t. 45 <i>d</i>; Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896.</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon agamemnon</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241, p1. 5, fig. A 6.8 ({\male}); id., 1927, p.35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56, p1. v, fig, A 6.8 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio {\ae}gisthus</i>,Linn{\ae}us, 1763, p. 401.</p>

<p><i>Papilio agamemnon</i> ab. <i>{\ae}gisthus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 449; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 100.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a spot at extreme base of costa, a transverse short bar near base of cell, and seven spots beyond two and two expect the apical spot, which is single; two spots beyond apex of cell; a spot at base of areas 1 <i>a</i> and 1, followed by two oblique short macular bands; a discal series of spots decreasing in size towards the costa, and a post-discal series of smaller spots that begins with two in area 1; the spots in area 7 are placed more distad than the others. Hind wing with a basal stripe, ending in a point area 1; a discal stripe, interrupted at lower edge of cell and not reaching beyond the middle of area 2; two post-discal series of spots; these markings are white in area 7; tail shorter than in the preceding race.</p>

<p>Fig. 64.--<i>G. agamemnon agamemnon</i> (Linn.).</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> fuliginous-brown or brownish-black, more or less suffused with pink along the costal margin, over the apical area, and along the outer edge of the discal markings on fore wing, broadly along the inner and outer margins and at base of areas 6 and 7 on hind wing; markings similar to those above, but less clearly defined and more greyish. Hind wing black; the spots on the pink area in areas 6 and 7 edged with red on inside. cilia very narrow, pale pink.</p>

<p>Specimens with a short stumpy tail are form <b>{\ae}gisthus</b> Linn.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---KUMAON to BURMA; common.</p>

<p>71 <i>b</i>.<b>Graphium agamemnon menides</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agamemnon menides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1904 <i>a</i>, p. 181(Ceylon); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 101.</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon menides</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon</i>, Moore, 1881 <i>a</i>, p. 145, p1. 63, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male}, larva).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Distinguished from the nominotypical race by the longer tail.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CEYLON and PENINSULAR INDIA; common. Ascends to 7,000 feet in the Nilgiris.</p>

<p>71 <i>c</i>. <b>Graphuim agamemnon andamana</b> (Lathy).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agamemnon andamana</i>, Lathy, 1907, p. 5; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>., p. 101.</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon andamanica</i> Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. This race only differs in the much greyer green colour of the markings on the upperside.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ANDAMAN ISLANDS; not rare.</p>

<p>71 <i>d</i>. <b>Graphium agamemnon decoratus</b> (Rothschild).</p>

<p><i>Papilio agamemnon decoratus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 452 (part.)(Nicobars); Bingham, 1907, pp. 108, 110; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 101</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon decoratus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.56.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> as in <i>andamana</i> Lathy. <i>Underside</i> of hind wing with at least five, usually seven, light red spots.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CAR NICOBAR and Central group of NICOBAR ISLANDS; not rare.</p>

<p>71 <i>e</i>. <b>Graphium agamemnon pulo</b> (Evans).</p>

<p><i>Zetides agamemnon pulo</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56 (S.Nicobars).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Resembles <i>decoratus</i> Roths., but the tails are absent or are very short.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTH NICOBAR ISLANDS; not rare.</p>

<p><i>Macareus</i> Group.</p>

<p>Ground-colour white or with a greenish tinge, veins striped with black, internervular, light longitudinal stripes as in Danaines. Hind wing beneath without red or yellow spots expect that an anal spot is often present. Hind wing rounded, no tail in the Indian species.</p>

<p>The species are all mimetic, those of the Indian area strongly resembling the Danaines which fly with them.</p>

<p>The group is connected with the <i>Antiphates</i> Group by a single tailed species--the rare <i>G. phidias</i> Oberth\dd{u}--found in Annam and Tong-king</p>

<p><b>Graphium macareus</b> (Godart).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Abdomen beneath with a black median line. <i>Upperside</i> of wings black or brownish- black, with white or greenish-white markings.</p>

<p>{\male}. Fore wing with three cell-stripes, which are sometimes broken up into small spots; two apical spots; outside end of cell a row of four dots, and distally to them, between vein 4 and inner margin, are five stripes, of which the two in area 1 are sometimes confluent. Hind wing with white stripes, the cell entirely or for the most part white with a black transverse line before the apex; scent-organ strongly developed. Both wings a row of submarginal spots.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> brownish, the light markings in the distal third of hind wing mostly less distinct than above.</p>

<p>{\female}. Either resembling the {\male} or is much darker.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---Common in most districts. The males congregate in swarms at wet places, whilst the females are taken singly in the woods on flowers, where they rest with closed wings.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---NORTHERN INDIA to Hainan, Bali, and the Philippines. A number of subspecies are distinguished, of  which four occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>72 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium macareus indicus</b> (Rothschild). (Fig. 65, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio macareus indicus</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 457 (Sikkim); Bingham, 1907, pp. 114-15 (part.), fig. 29; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p.104, t. 48.c.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis indicus</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 110, p1. 515, figs 2, 2 <i>a</i>, 2<i>b</i>({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis macareus indicus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p.35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis polynices</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 568; Moore, 1903, p. 109, p1. 515, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male} {\female})</p>

<p><i>Papilio macareus de Nic\'eville</i>, 1892, p. 345, p1 1, fig. 1 ({\male}) (aberration Sikkim).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with broad white stripes, those in the cell not divided, and the two in area I not confluent. Hind wing with broad stripes, the cell entirely white, the oblique subapical line weakly developed.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar to the {\male}. Fore wing with the white discal stripes broader than the black vein-stripes which separate them.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female} 80-100 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---Not variable as a rule. A striated aberration of the {\male} is described and figured by de Nic\'eville, (1892). The discal streaks of both wings are extended to include the marginal spots, and they are also joined on the fore wing to the four rounded spots beyond end of cell. The  cell of the fore wing has a basal patch and a tripartite patch in the middle. Underside markings much the same as above, but are larger and more suffused.</p>

<p>Fig. 65.---<i>G.macarenu indicus </i> (Roths.).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM. The {\male} not rare.</p>

<p>72 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium macareus lioneli </b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio macareus lioneli</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>c</i>, p . 74 (Assam); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 104.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis macareus lioneli</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p.35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56.</p>

<p>{\male}. Not distinguishable from <i>indicus</i> expect in specimens with narrower white stripes</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing brown-black with white submarginal spots, the light discal stripes scarcely indicated. Hind wing with a white spot in apex of cell and white stripes round the cell, these stripes narrower than in <i>indicus</i>, the posterior ones not reaching the base, the submarginal spots well developed.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---There is a {\male} in the Tring Museum, from the Khasi Hills, in which the submarginal spots of the hind wing above and beneath are enlarged; beneath they form a band which commences behind the subcostal with a specially strongly enlarged spot; the costal margin is broadly edged with brown.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i> ASSAM. The {\male} not rare.</p>

<p>72 <i>c</i>. <b>Graphium macareus gyndes</b> (Jordan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio macareus gyndes</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 104; Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis macareus gyndes</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 56</p>

<p>{\male}. Resembles <i>lioneli</i>, the white stripes mostly somewhat narrower than in <i>indicus</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. Resembles <i>indicus</i> {\female}, but the white spots in the apical half of fore wing and the distal half of hind wing smaller.</p>'

<p><i>Variation</i>.---Tenasserim males have narrower white stripes than the preceding forms, but the cell of hind wing is still almost entirely filled uo with white; moreover the three cell-stripes on the fore wing above are not, or not distinctly, interrupted.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---NORTHERN BURMA to TAVOY; rare.</p>

<p>72 <i>d</i>. <b>Graphium macareus perakensis</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio macareus perakensis</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1889 <i>c</i>, pp. 283-4 ({\male}) (Perak); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 104.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis macareus perakensis</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.56.</p>

<p>{\male}. White markings very broad, the upper discal streak joined to the spots beyond the cell. Fore wing cell-stripes broad and complete on <i>upperside</i>, and broken into three spots on <i>underside</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. As in <i>lioneli</i>, but the apical area of fore wing much darker and the spots thereon quite white, while the others are sullied. Fore wing discal streaks in areas 2 and 3 short, not nearly reaching the base; cell-stripes much reduced.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---MERGUI ARCHIPELAGO to SOUTHERN BURMA; rare: less rare in the Malay Peninsula.</p>

<p><b>Graphuim xenocles</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female} Much larger than <i>macareus</i>, the wings broader, the white stripes larger than in <i>macareus</i> from the same districts, hind wing with a yellow anal spot.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---NORTHERN INDIA to Hainan and Siam, occurring together with  <i>macareus</i>. Three out of five subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>73 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphuim xenocles phrontis</b> (de Nic\'eville). (Fig. 66, imago).</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis phrontis</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1897 <i>a</i>, p. 568 ({\male} {\female}) (Sikkim); Moore, 1903, p. 112, p1. 516, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles phrontis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 104.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis xenocles phrontis</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 35; id., 1932 <i>a</i>p. 56; Tytler, 1926, p. 249(melanic {\male} from Sikkim).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles</i> f. <i>xenokrates</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>a</i>, p. 146.</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles phrontis</i>, f. {\ae}st. <i>xenocrates</i> Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 229 ({\female}, Sikkim, wet-season form); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 104.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> black, with greenish or bluish-white markings. Fore wing cell with three transverse, very oblique, broad streaks and two elongate spots near apex; broad stripes from base in areas 1 <i>a</i> to 3; a series of four rounded spots beyond end of cell in areas 4, 5, 6, and 8, followed by five short streaks, that are outwardly truncate or emarginate, in areas 4 to 8; a submarginal series of large rounded spots. Hind wing with a broad curved cell-stripe; broad stripes from base in areas 1 to 7, variable in length, the stripe in area 7 white a prominent yellow anal spot, which sometimes extends into area 2; a submarginal series of spots, some or all of which may be absent but, when present, the posterior three always somewhat lunate.</p>

<p>Fig. 66.---<i>G. xenocles phrontis</i> (de Nic\'ev.).</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> fuliginous-brown, paler towards the apical area of fore wing; markings as above, but duller and less clearly defined; the yellow anal spot very large. Antenn{\ae}, head, thorax, and abdomen black; two spots on the head, the thorax and abdomen laterally white; underside of thorax and abdomen white, the latter with a medial and a lateral narrow stripe.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 85-120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---Specimens in which the distal margin of the hind wing beneath is narrow and black-brown are named <b>xenocrates</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM and BHUTAN; not rare.</p>

<p>73 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium xenocles xenocles</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles</i>, Doubleday, 1842, p. 74 (Assam); id., 1846 <i>b</i>, p. 20. p1. 10, fig. 2 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 458 (part); Bingham, 1907, pp. 113-14, fig. 28 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis xenocles</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 112, p1. 516, fig. 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles xenocles</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp.. 103-5. t. 47 <i>a</i>.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis xenocles xenocles</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; idd., 1927, p. 37; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57, p1. vi, fig. A 7.2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles</i> f. vern. <i>theronus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 227; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 105.</p>

<p>{\male}. As in <i>phrontis</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. Much darker than <i>phrontis</i>, the light stripes very strongly reduced; fore wing usually lighter brown basally than distally, the cell-spots thin and, towards the costa, indistinct or suppressed, the light discal stripes much narrower than the dark vein-stripes; hind wing with small yellow anal spot often only just indicated.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---Males with light light brown marginal area on the hind wing below are named <b>theronus</b> Fruhst.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ASSAM; not rare.</p>

<p> 73 <i>c</i>. <b>Graphium xenocles kephisos</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles kephisos</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 b (<i>b</i>), p. 346 ({\female}), Tong-king; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 105; Ollenbach, 1921, p.896.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis kephisos</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 117.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis xenocles kephisos</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 241; id., 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57.</p>

<p><i>Papilio xenocles kephisos</i> f. vern, <i>neronus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>c</i>, p.74 (upper Tong-king); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 105.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis neronus</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 114, p1. 517, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>{\male}.</p>

<p>{\male}. Hind wing with the light discal srripes on the whole somewhat narrower than in the preceding forms.</p>

<p>{\female}.Resembles the {\male}, but the light stripes narrower.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---Males with broader and lighter brown distal margin to the hind wing beneath are named <b>neronus</b> Fruhst. and are thought to be a dry-season form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.----BURMA; rare, especially the {\female}. Occures also in Tong-king and Siam.</p>

<p><b>Grapjium megarus</b> (Westwood).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}.Abdomen below without black median lines. {\male} scent-organ strongly developed. Markings greenish-white. Fore wing with three rows of spots between the cell and outer margin, the spots of the two inner rows in areas 1 and 2 united into three stripes. Hind wing the long stripes in the basal half, short streaks round apex of cell, and between these and outer margin three rows of spots, of which the submarginal ones are lunular. The light markings very individually in size.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---The males are common on moist sand, and the females are taken singly in the woods.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---NORTHERN INDIA to Hainan, Sumatra, Borneo, and Banguey Island. Two of the four subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>74 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium megarus megarus</b> (Westwood). (Fig. 67, imago).</p>

<p><i>Papilio megarus</i>, Westwood, 1845, p. 98, p1. 72, fig. 2 (Assam); Rothschild, 1895, p.460 (part.), Bingham, 1907, pp. 115-15, gfig. 30 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis megarus</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 114, p1. 57, figs 2, 2 <i>a</i> ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio megarus megarus</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 106, t. 46 <i>d</i>.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis megarus megarus</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 242, p1. vi, fig. A 7.3; id., 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.57, p1. vi, fig. A 7.3{\male}.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a small basal cell-spot followed by three obliquely transverse streaks in middle of cell, none extended to either the subcostal or median veins, and two spots near apex of cell; single slender, narrow strips in areas 1 <i>a</i> and 2, and two streaks in area 1; above these a spot at base followed by a streak in each of areas 3, 4, 6, and 8, an outer spot only in area 5, and a basal spot in area 7; a complete series of small submarginal spots. Hind wing with a cell-streak and a spot near the upper angle; a streak followed by a spot in each of areas 1, 6, and 7; three elongate spots in areas 2 and 3 and two in areas 4 and 5; a series of four slender submarginal lunules in areas 2 to 5.</p>

<p>Fig. 67.---<i>G</i>, megarus megarus (Westw.).</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> markings slightly broader, the cell-spots of fore wing obsolete.</p>

<p>{\female}. Ground-colour more fuliginous-black, markings similar to {\male}, on the fore wing slightly broader, on the hind wing slightly narrower, than in the {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 65-90 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---ASSAM to NAORTHERN BURMA; rare.</p>

<p>74 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium megarus megapenthes</b> (Fruhst.).</p>

<p><i>Papilio megarus (sic) megapenthes</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>e</i>, p. 161 ({\male} {\female}, Annam).</p>

<p><i>Papilio similis</i>, Lathy, 1899, p. 149 (Siam).</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis similis</i>, Moore, 1904, p. 118.</p>

<p><i>Papilio megarus similis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 106.</p>

<p><i>Paranticopis megarus similis</i>, Evans, 1933, p. 242; id., 1927 p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57.</p>

<p><i>Papilio megarus megarus</i>, Ollenbach (<i>non</i> Westw.), 1921, p. 896.</p>

<p>The name <i>similis</i> Lathy is a primary homonym of <i>papilio similis</i> Linn{\ae}us, 1758, and so cannot be used.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Differs from the nominotypical race in the more strongly developed cell-spots of the fore wing on both sides.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SHAN STATES to SOUTHREN BURMA; rare. Also found in Hainan, Tong-king, Siam, the Malay Peninsula, and North-East Sumatra.</p>

<p>Recorded by Ollenbach (1921) as a very uncommon species in Tavoy. ``On the wing it looks very like <i>Danais septentrionis</i> and may easily be overlooked.''</p>

<p>There is melanic specimen of the {\female} in the British Museum, presented by Brigadier Evans, and taken at Victoria Point, February 1924. The white  markings on both sides of the fore wing are largely obscured.</p>

<p><i>Payeni</i> Group.</p>

<p>This group compries only three species, and is sufficiently distinct to have received the generic name of <i>Meandrusa</i> Moore.</p>

<p>Fore wing with veins 10 and 11 free, 9 arising before apex of cell, middle discocellular deeply incurved. Tarsal claw with a tooth in or behind the middle. {\male} scent-fold of hind wing weakly developed. The wings are densely scaled and for the most part are yellow-brown or black-brown, Fore wing more or less strongly falcate. Hind wing with a long spatulate tail. Antenn{\ae} comparativlely short, not half length of fore wing.</p>

<p>The group is distributed from China to the large Sunda Islands, and two species occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p><b>Graphium gyas</b> (Westwood).</p>

<p>{\male}. Body greenish, the head and underside of thorax chestnut-brown. <i>Upperside</i> of wings dark brown with a broad dark outer border bearing a row of yellowish spot; similar spots also on the disc of fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with a large chestnut-brown basal area, both wing with an apical cell-spot; discal area of both wings white-grey with dark crescents, the hind wing with light, dark edged, submarginal spots, which are only indicated on the fore wing.</p>

<p>{\female}. A broad white discal band, which on the fore wing becomes yellow near the costa and is here more or less distinctly broken up into patches, whilst it has a bluish tone on the hind wing; submarginal spots larger than in the {\male}; tail broadly margined with chestnut-brown.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---Occurs in wooded mountain districts from 6,000 to 7,000 feet; commonest in the Khasi Hills.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---SIKKIM to BURMA.</p>

<p>75 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium gyas gyus</b> (Westwood).</p>

<p><i>Papilio gyas</i>, Westwood, 1841, p. 41, p1. 11, fig, 1 ({\male}); Rothschild, 1895, p. 401; Bingham, 1907, pp. 92-3.</p>

<p><i>Dabasa gyas</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 49. p1. 484, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, 1 <i>b</i> ({\male} {\female})</p>

<p><i>Papilio gyas gyas</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 91, t. 39. <i>c</i>.</p>

<p><i>Meandrusa gyas gyas</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 242, p1. 6, fig. A 8.1; id., 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57, p1. vi, fig.A. 8.1 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio lachinus</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>b (b)</i>, p. 342 (Sikkim).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> opaque brown, the basal area and distal third of both wings of a darker shade than the broad discal area; both wings with a submarginal series of yellow lunules that curve upwards posteriorly on the hind wing and end in a diffuse transverse bluish-white mark across area 1.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the basal third and a large discocellular spot, that is widened anteriorly, rich dark cinnamon-brown; discal third lilacine, pale postiorly, widened anteriorly and extended into the apex of cell, and on costa from discocellulars to near apex of wing; areas 2 to 4 with paler lilacine lunules; distal third of wing  dull brown, with a post-discal and a submarginal series of somewhat obscure olivaceous-yellow lunules. Hind wing with the basal third rich dark cinnamon-brown, the remainder lilacine, with a large posterior discal patch of cinnamon brown, edged inwardly by a diffues broad irregular white band, and outwardly by a series of white lunules; a submarginal, somewhat obscure row of olivaceous-yellow markings; tail and outer margin dark cinnamon-brown.</p>

<p>{\female}.<i>Upperside</i> ground-colour similar to that in the {\male}. Both wings with a very broad discal lilacine white band that extends from vein 5 and from within apex of cell of fore wing to inner margin of wing. Fore wing with a yellowish-white costal spot in upper third of cell, a larger spot beyond that turns to yellow a t base of area 5, an anterior post-discal transverse series of yellow, more or less lunular spots, and a similar series of yellow, more or less lunular spots, and a similar series of submarginal spots. Hind wing with the discal band thickly irrorated with browinsh scales where it extends to the base, and also its outer edge posteriorly; remainder of the tail broadly bright cinnamon-brown; a submarginal series of large, yellow, well-definded, more or less lunular spots.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> as in the {\male}, the ground-colour and markings on the outer two-thirds of both wings paler.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 105-115 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i> SIKKIM to ASSAM;rare.</p>

<p>75  <i>b</i>. <b>Graphuim gyas aribas</b> (Fruhstorfer).</p>

<p><i>Papilio gyas aribbas</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1909 <i>b</i>, p. 177 (Upper Burma); Jordan, 1909, <i>a</i>, p</i>. 91.</p>

<p><i>Meandrusa gyas aribbas</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 242; id., 1927, p. 36; 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57.</p>

<p>{\male}. Distinguished from the nominotypical race by the smaller spots on the fore wing above and the lighter discal area of the underside.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---UPPER BURMA to the Dawna Range; very rare The {\female} does mot appear to be known.</p>

<p><b>Graphuim payeni</b> (Boisduval).</p>

<p>{\female} Body ochreous-yellow, the vertex and collar yellow-brown; tooth of claws large. Ground-colour of wings ochreous-yellow with slightly greenish tone. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the greater part of the cell  yellow-brown; a discocellular patch and a transverse cell-spot brown-black. Hind wing narrower and more triangular than in <i>gyas</i>, without distinctly marked anal angle.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> lighter, tthe basal area of both wings with a brown band broken up into spots, the distal third commonly darker than the  middle of the wing, always with brown lines and rows of spots, which are often confluent; hind wing with a number of silver spots on the disc.</p>

<p>{\female} paler than the {\male}, with broader wings and smaller dark markings.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---SIKKIM and Hainan to Java and Borneo; found at medium elevations in the mountains. Two of the seven subspecies occur in the India area.</p>

<p>76 <i>a</i>. <b>Graphium payeni evan</b> (Doubleday).</p>

<p><i>Papilio even</i>, Doubleday, 1845, p. 235; id., 1846 <i>b</i>, p. 14, p1. 2, fig, 2({\female}); Bingham, 1907, pp. 91-2, p1. 14, fig. 92 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Meandrusa even</i>, Moore, 1903, p. 47, p1. 483, figs. 1, 1 <i>a-</i>1 <i>c</i> ({\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio payeni evan</i>, Rothschild, 1895, p. 401; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 91 t. 39 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Meandrusa payeni even</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 242, p1. 6, fig. A 8.2; id., 1927, p.36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57, p1. vi. A 8.2; id., 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, 57, p1. vi, fig. A 8.2 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Papilio even evenides</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1902 <i>d</i>, p. 65; id., 1903 <i>a</i>, p. 193 (Sikkim).</p>

<p>{\male}.  <i>Upperside</i> bright ochraceous, basally with a darker shade. Fore wing with two or three oblique cell-spots, and a larger one at its upper angle; the costal margin from base and the outer margin very broadly dark brown, with an incomplete discal series of dark brown spots on its inner side; a series of brown lunules which anteriorly and posteriorly merge into the marginal brown; a  more or less complete submarginal row of lunules of the ochraceous ground-colour, reduced in some specimens to only rwo or three lunules above the tornus. Hind wing with the distal half or more dark brown, with anb inner post-discal and an outer submarginal series of more or less lunular spots of the ochraceous ground-colour; the post-discal series consists of only four spots in areas 1 to 4; the submarginal series is complete to area 7, the spots larger, that in area 3 elongate, outwardly conical; tail tipped with ochraceous.    </p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> ground-colour a deeper rich ochraceous. Fore wing with a number of irregular cinnamon-brown spots over the cell and basal area; distal area with transverse series of more or less irregular and incomplete lunular cinnamon brown markings and a narrow brown marginal edging. Hind wing with a transverse series of three basal spots, a large spot aty apex of cell, the basaes of areas 1 to 3, followed by three more or less complete but irregular series of lunular markings, cinnamon-brown; the inner discal row of brown lunules bearing a series of snow-white crescent, conspicuous only in areas 1 and 2, but barely indicated anteriorly.</p>

<p>{\female]. Ground-colour paler. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with base and cell shaded bright, very pale cinnamon; costal margin ochraceous alomost to the apex. Hind wing with very large submarginal ochraceous lunules, separated from one another only by the brown along the veins.</p>
	
<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 110-130 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM to ASSAM; not rare.</p>

<p>76 <i>b</i>. <b>Graphium payeni amphis</b> (Jordan).</p>

<p><i>Papilio payeni amphis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 91 (Tenasserim, Burma); Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896.</p>

<p><i>Meandrusa payeni amphis</i>, Evans, 1923, p. 242; id., 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with a well-defined dark brown line from vein 3 to vein 7 along the inner edge of the dark marginal area, separating off some small yellow spots. Hind wing with a discal yellow spot in area 5 in addition to the other four; the anterior discal spot is lunular, and there is a distinct yellow spot at the proximal side of the spot in area 3.</p> 

<p><i>Underside</i> ground-colour darker than in <i>evan</i>, the dark markings in the distal area of both wings sharper and narrower, the syubmarginal line almost without interruption, the silver spots larger than in <i>evan</i>, and the brown subbasal transverse patch behind vein 8 is placed nearer to the corresponding costal spot than to the precostal vein.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTHERN BURMA; rare.</p>

<p>Genus <b>LAMPROPTERA</b> Gray.</p>

<p><i>Lamproptera</i>, Gray, 1832, p1. 108, 4, {\male} (non <i>curius</i> Fabr. <i>=meges</i> Zink.); Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 153 (type, <i>P. curius</i> Fabr., 1787); Roopke, 1935, p. 42 (type <i>meges</i> Zink.).</p>

<p><i>Leptpcircus</i>, Swainson, 1933, p1. 106 (<i>meges</i> Z.); Doubleday 1843, p. 109; Moore, 1902, p. 132: Wytsman, 1902, p. 112; Bingham, 1907, p. 5; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, pp. 11, 107.</p>

<p><i>Lamprosura</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 380.</p>

<p>Type, <i>L.meges Zink</i>.</p>

<p>This genus is better known as <i>Leptocircus</i>, but like many other well-known names <i>Leptocircus</i> must be superseded according to the rules of priority. <i>Lamproptera</i> is a very distinct genus with sharply-defined facies; especially characteristic are the long, narrow tails and comparatively long antenn{\ae}. It differs from most other Graphiini in having veins 11 and 12 of the fore wing free; one species has a scent-fold on the hind wing, as in most others of the tribe, and has also, as in the <i>Payeni</i> Group, a tooth on each of the tarsal claws. Besides this, the strongly-built body, the markings of body, and wings, and the scaled greenish legs recall the species of <i>Graphium</i>. The fore wing has a strong median spur which connects with the thickened basal part of the fold and not with vein 1 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p>``Head broad, thorax thick, abdomen scarcely longer than the thorax.  The antenn{\ae} extend beyond the apex of the cell of fore wing; above scaled, the sensory hairs almost uniformly distributed over the scaleless underside; club short and broad. Legs scaled. Fore wing with veins 11 and 12 from the cell, 8 and 9 lonng-stalked, 7 from this stalk nearer to the cell than to branch 8, anterior angle of cell pointed; in the hind wing cell very small.</p>


<p>``Fore wing triangular, the hind margin much shorter than the distal margin; before the middle a right oblique band, whichis continued on the hind wing and is in part scaleless; between cell and distal margin a large, transparent,  scaleless triangular area, which is divided by thin black vein-stripes into six to eight spots. Hind wing narrow and long, folded, produced into a very long tail, which is distally edged with white. {\male} and {\female} similar; {\female} with a large ventral copulation-groove before the tip of the abdomen'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>,``The butterflies are common in most parts of their range. They occur near the water in open places, over which they dart backwards and forwards near the ground, their  rapid flight resembling that of dragonflies; they are immoderate water drinkers, and often squirt the water out again rhythmically at the anus. They are also commonly met with at flowers, before which they hang with the wings vibrating rapidly and the tails quivering and raised high, without resting on the flower'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---South-East China to Java, Celebes, and the Philippines.</p>

<p>The two species comprising this genus both occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p><i>Key to Species</i>.</p>

<p>1. Upperside with band white, on the fore
      wing constricted towards the centre.
      {\male} hind wing with white scent-organ.....</p>  <p><i>curius</i> (Fabr.), p. 244.</p>
      
<p>2.Upperside with band green. The black 
      band of nearly width.  {\male} hind wing
      without scent-organ</p>                        <p><i>meges</i> (Zink.), p. 245.</p>

<p><b>Lamproptera curius</b> (Faricius)</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. The tarsal claw with a long tooth. Hind wing of {\male} with a white scent-organ on the abdomenal fold. Both wings with the oblique band white.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---North-East China to ASSAM, south and east to Java and Palawan. The nominotypical form occurs in the Indian area.</p>

<p>77 <b>Lamprotera  curius curius</b> (Fabricius).</p>

<p><i>Papilio curius</i>, Fabricius, 1787, p. 9; Donovan, 1800, p1. 47, fig. 1.</p>

<p><i>;Leptocircus curius</i>, Distant, 1886, p. 366, p1. 42. fig. 1; Swinhoe, 1893, p. 315; Moore, 1902, pp. 134, 135, p1. 417, figs. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a, b</i> </p>
 
({\female}); Wytsman, 1902, p. 2, tab. fig. 1 ({\male}), fig. 7 (venation), fig. 8 (tarsus), 11 (palpus); Bingham 1907, p. 6; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 108; Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896; Evans, 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 58.</p> 

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dull brounish-black. Fore wing with a broad outwardly oblique white transverse band that crosses from a little beyond the basal third of costal margin to inner margin, its outer half hyaline, followed by a hyaline triangular area that does not reach the costa or margin, but is traversed by conspicuously black veins. Between the semihyaline transverse band and the hyaline area the black forms a more or less even band slightly narrower in the middle; the black edging to the costa and outer margin broad broadened towards the apex; cilia black. Hind wing with the white band of the fore wing continued straight across and ending in a point on the outer half of vein 3, but is not hyaline along its outer margin; posterior half of wing dull dark brown. irrorated towards the base of the long narrow tail at vein; 4 with white scales; cilia black, white below vein 5 and along outer side of basal half of tail, the latter tipped white.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> similar, but the ground-colour opaque brownish-black; a broad outwardly ill-defined earthy-grey streak along the base of the wings produced slightly down the inner margin of hind and along costa of fore wing. Hind wing with the white band joined by a sinuous short white cross-line from inner margin to apex; below this latter a number of irregular white spots on the tornal area.</p>

<p>Antenn{\ae}, head and thorax black, abdomen dark brownish-black; beneath, the palpi, thorax, and abdomen greyish; claws of tarsi bifid. Hind wing of {\male} with white tuft of scent-hairs on the fold.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 40-50 mm.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---ASSAM to BURMA; not rare Extends to Java and Palawan.</p>

<p><b>Lamproptera meges</b> (Zinken-Sommer).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Tarsal claws simple. Hind wing of {\male} without scent-organ. The oblique band of both wings green, this area without scales.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---Hainan, Tong-king, and BURMA, south to Java, the Philippines, and Celebes. Two subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>78 <i>a.</i> <b>Lamproptera meges indistincta</b> (Tytler).</p>

<p><i>Leptocircus meges indistincta</i>, Tytler, 1912, p. 588 (Naga Hills); Evans, 1923, p. 242; id., 1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i>, p.58.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Hind wing below with the tornal area much greyer; the three white transverse bands are blurred and not clearly defined.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 40-55 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>: ASSAM to NORTHERN BURMA. Taken not uncommonly in the Naga Hills at 4,000-5,000 feet, from April to October; a single {\male} was also taken at Gaspani, 1,700 feet, in July.</p>

<p>78 <i>b</i>. <b>Lamproptera meges virescens</b>(Butler). (P1. III, fig. 4, imago).</p>

<p><i>Leptocircus virescens</i>, Butler, 1869 <i>a</i>, p. 259; Staudinger, 1884, p. 21, t. 14 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Leptocircus meges virescens</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 108; Ollenbach, 1921, p. 896; Evans, 1924, p. 42, p1. 6 fig, A 10.2 ({\male}); id.,1927, p. 36; id., 1932 <i>a</i> p. 58, p1. vi, fig. A 10. 2 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Leptocircus meges</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 136 (part.); Bingham, 1907, p. 6 (part.), p1. xi, fig. 81 (imago).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female} Fore wing with the black median band never twice as broad in the middle as the green band. Hind wing below with grey basal scaling rather sharply defined, the white band along inner margin placed closer to be tornus than in <i>indistincta</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habnitat</i>.---In October 1892, in the Dawna Range in Tenasserium, Col. Bingham and Mr. de Nic\'eville found a {\female} ovipositing on the underside of the leaves of <i>illigera burmanica</i> King, a creeper belonging to the family Combretace{\ae}. The eggs, of which two or three were collected, were spherical, smooth, pale green, almost transparent, and of the usual palpilionid form.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---KAREN HILLS to SOUTHERN BURMA; common. Also in Hainan, Tong-king, Annam, Siam, and the Malay Peninsula</p>

<p>Tribe IV. <b>TEINOPALPINI</b>.</p>

<p>Teinopalpid{\ae}, Grote, 1892, pp. 17, 20.</p>

<p>``Frons projecting conically; palpai very long, curved club, scaleless except at the base, the segments almost cylindrical, the sensory hairs alimost uniformly distributed over the underside. Neuration similar to that of <i>Papilio</i>, the median spur of the fore wing only indicated, the upper tarnsverse vein of the fore wing short, the 2nd long and incurved; apex of fore wing pointed, hind wing one ({\male}) or two ({\female}) long tails''(<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p>Comprises the single genus <i>Teninopalus</i> Hope.</p>

<p>Genus <b>TEINOPALPUS</b> Hope.</p>

<p><i>Teinopalpus</i>, Hope, 1843, p. 131; Moore, 1902, p. 127; Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, pp. 21-3, t. fig. 7 (venation), fig. 8 (palpus), fig. 9 (tarsus); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 108; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 152 (type imperialis Hope).</p>

<p><i>Teinoprosopos</i> C.{amp; R. Felder, 1864 <i>a</i>, pp. 331.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---SIKKIM to SOUTHERN BURMA, South China. Two species are known, one of which is confined to the mountains of Kwantung in South China.</p>

<p><b>Teinpalpus imperialis</b> Hope.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> black, with green markings; fore wing before the middle with a black, gently curved line and two post-discal, broad, blackish, indistinctly defined shadowy bands; <i>outer margin black with white fringes</i>. Hind wing with a black discal line, at the distal side of which there is a yellow area, the space from here to inner margin edged with white, before the outer margin green-yellow submarginal lunules, tail yellow at tip.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> brownish-yellow with black bands; fore wing with green discal line.</p>

<p>{\female}. Larger than {\male}, paler, <i>Uppweside</i> of fore wing with two grey bands; hind wing with large grey central area, which is narrower and yellow before inner margin; marginal teeth longer than in {\male}, the tooth at vein 6 developed into a tail which is shorter than the tail at vein 4 and is yellowish-grey at the apex.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with green basal aera, remainder grey with black bands. Hind wing almost as above, sometimes entirely without yellow.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i>.---As yet imperfectly known. A note on the larva was published by O. Lindgren in Journ. Bomb. Nat. Hist. Soc. xxvii, 1921, p. 177:- ``The caterpillar was green, with a large, thick head, Papilio-shaped. The pupa was oval, greenish, with a strange horn.'' The larva pupated at the end of september, and the butterfly emerged the following April. The larva was fairly full-grown, and was found on the road near Sukia in Sikkim, at 6,050 feet elevation. The food-plant is said to be a species of <i>Daphne</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---``The butterfly is very local, and only occurs at medium and higher evelation in the mountains (6,000-10,000) feet in wooded districts. It uasually remains in the tops of trees, from which it only comes down from about 8 to 11, O' clock in the morning when the sun shining, and can then be attracted by baiting. Its flight is exceedingly fast. The best localities are open places on the tops of mountains surrounded by timber forests'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.--- SIKKIM to SOUTHERN BURMA. Two subspecies are known.</p>

<p>79 <i>a</i>. <b>Teinopalpus imperialis imperialis</b> Hope. (P1.III, fig. 5, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Teinopalpus imperialis</i>, Hope, 1843, p. 131, p1. 14, fig. 1, 2 ({\male}); Doubleday, Westwood {amp; Howitson, 1846, p. 2, p1. 1, fig. 1 ({\female}); Moore, 1902, p. 128, p1. 415, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>: Stichel, 1907, p. 23, t. 2, fig. 12 ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 8, p1. xi, fig. 80; Lindgren, 1921, p. 177 (larva).</p>

<p><i>Teinopalpus imperialis imperialis</i>, Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 108, t. 49 <i>c</i>; Evans, 1927, p. 57; id., 1932, p. 57, p1. vi, fig. A 9.1 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Teinopalpus paryi{\ae}</i> ({\female}), Hope, 1843, p. 131, p1. 11, figs. 3, 4.</p

<p><i>Teinopalpus imperialis himalaicus</i>, Rothschild, 1898, p. 602; Moore, 1902. p1 415, fig, 1,1 <i>a</i>; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 188; Rothschild, 1918, p. 69.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> black, densely irrorated with green scales. Fore wing with an outwardly oblique, slightly concave subbasal band and a narrow marginal edging jet-black, due to the ground-colour there being devoid of the green scaling; beyond the subbasal band the irroration of scales is a much brighter green, especially along the outer edge of the subasal band itself, but it thins out to leave shadowy, broad, convergent discal and post-discal bands and a narrower submarginal band; in some specimens, owing to the transparency of the wings the rich ochraceous-brown colour of the underside gives the black on these bands a reddish tint. Hind wing with the basal area margined outwardly by a narrow, irregularly sinuous band devoid of green scaling, followed by an anterior discal bright  chrome-yellow patch that spreads from base of area 3 across the apex of cell and bases of areas 4 and 5 to the costa; this patch is bluntly angulated outwards in area 5, stained with orange anteriorly, and bordered outwardly by black, which is widest above; below the patch a white line extends to the inner margin; the post-discal area is deep dark green, margined inwardly by diffuse dark grey, and followed outwardly by a submarginal series of lunular markings, the tornal and upper two or three of which are yellow, the rest bright green; tail tipped with yellow.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of both wings basal area densely covered with green scales. Fore wing with marginal two-thirds rich ochraceous-brown, the green of the basal area bordered by black; discal and post-discal bands also black, widened and diffusely coalescent posteriorly; an incomplete, very slender submarginal black line and broader black marginal edging, neither of which reaches to the apex. Hind wing much as on upperside, but the yellow markings broader. Antenn{\ae} dark red; head thorax, and abdomen black, covered somewhat densely with green hairs and scales.</p>

<p>{\female}. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with the irroration of green scales on the distal two-thirds restricted to a submarginal moderately broad band diffuse along its inner edge, and a discal, somewhat ill-defined similar band that is bordered both on the inner and outer sides by diffuse dusky black; this is succeeded by two broad diffuse dark grey bands, the outer of the two edged on its distal side narrowly with black, followed by a submarginal green band and outer velvety black margin. Hind wing with a large dark grey discal patch, below which comparatively narrow markings of yellow extend to the inner margin; a post-discal sinuous lunular narrow black band and a submarginal series of green lunules as in the {\male}, but the apical lunule dark grey, not yellow; the tail-like extensions of the margin at apices of veins 3 to 6 are black shaded with green, those at the apices of veins 4 and 6 tipped, the former with yellow, the latter with greenish-white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> for the most part grey, with markings much as in the {\male}; fore wing a well-marked moderately broad submarginal band which is of a dull ochraceous colour; hind wing grey discal area extending to the apical lunule of the submarginal series.</p>

<p><i>Expense</i>: {\male} {\female}, 90-120 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM to ASSAM; rare.</p>

<p>79 <i>b</i>, <b>Teinopalpus imperialis imperatrix</b> de Nic\'eville.</p>

<p><i>Teinopalpus imperatrix</i>, de Nic\'eville, 1899 <i>b</i>, p. 335, p1. BB ({\male} {\female}) (Toungoo Hills, 4,000 feet); Moore, 1902, p. 131, p1. 416, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> ({\male} {\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 9; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 108; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 57.</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> less densely scaled with green than the preceding race. Hind wing with the yellow area not entering the cell, and on the underside reaching to vein 2; marginal teeth longer than in the preceding race.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> of fore wing with broader black bands; on hind wing the discal patch broader.</p>

<p>{\female}. Much larger than the {\female}. of the preceding race and with more prominent black anteriorly densely dusted with black, posteriorly broader than in <i>imperialis</i> yellow to vein 4 and beyond marginal teeth longer.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---NORTHERN BURMA, and southwards to Ataran River; rare.</p>

<p>Subfamily <b>ZERYNTHIN{\AE}</b>.</p>

<p><i>Zerynthiin{\ae}</i>, Kirby, 1902, p. 86.</p>

<p><i>Thaidin{\ae}</i> Kirby, 1896, p. 242.</p>

<p>Hind wing tailed or with toothed margin; the basal cell large, elongate, longer than broad; precostal vein curved basad. Antenn{\ae} rather short. Palpus long and strongly projecting. Larva (where known) short and thick, with a short, fleshy fork behind the head; on <i>Aristolochia</i>. Pupa slender.</p>

<p>This is essentially a Pal{\ae}arctic group, of which <i>Armandia</i> is the only representative found in the Indian region.</p>

<p>Genus <b>ARMANDIA</b> Blanchard.</p>

<p><i>Armandia</i>,Blanchard, 1871, p. 809; Moore , 1902, p.124; Seitz, 1907, p. 16; Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, pp. 16, 17; Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 109; Verity, 1911, pp. 1xxvii, 1xxix, 1xxxi; Bingham, 1907, p. 2,. fig. 1 <i>c</i> (venation).</p>

<p><i>Bhutanitis</i>, Atkinson, 1873 <i>a</i>, p. 570.</p>

<p>``Body with rough hairs weak in proportion to the size of the wings; head small; palpi pointed, projecting; antenn{\ae} scaleless, thin, short, with weak club, the sensory hairs dense at the base of the segments on the underside, abdomen long, thickest in the posterior half; legs short. Wings long, fore wing rounded, veins 10 and 11 free, 7, 8, and 9 stalked together, 6 arising from upper angle of cell, median spur very weakly indicated. Hind wing long-toothed, with long tail at vein 4, and a shorter one at each of the median veins; precostal vein directed basad, basal cell large'' (<i>Jordan</i>, 1909).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---NORTHERN INDIA and WEST China. Two species are known.</p>

<p><b>Armandia lidderdalei</b> (Atkinson).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Wings black marked with grey lines. Hind wing from vein 5 to inner margin with a large bright-coloured area, which is proximally rose-red and distally black, and is bordered by yellow patches; tail obtusely pointed.</p>

<p><i>Early stages</i> unknown.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---``The butterfly has a feeble flight and allows itself to be driven backwards and forwards by the wind between the tops of trees like a dry leaf. It also visits flowers, and during shower it sits on a leaf and pushes the fore wing over the hind wing, so that the brilliant colours of the latter are concealed'' (<i>Doherty</i>, quoted by <i>Jordan</i>, 1909 a).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---NORTHERN INDIA and WEST China, the Chinese specimens constituting a distinct subspecies.</p>

<p>80. <b>Armandia lidderdalei lidderdalei</b> (Atkinson). (Fig. 68, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Bhutanitis lidderdaleii</i>, Atkinson, 1873 <i>a</i>, p. 570, p1. 50 ({\male}) (Bhutan); Elwes, 1891, p. 251.</p>

<p><i>Armandia lidderdaleii</i>, Doherty, 1891, p. 251; Jordan, 1898, p. 384 (antenna); Moore, 1902, p. 125, p1. 413, figs. 1 ({\male}), 1 <i>a</i> ({\female}); Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 17, t. 2, fig. 4 (venation), fig. 5 (palpus), fig. 6 <i>a, b</i> (tibia and tarsus); Bingham, 1907, pp. 3, 4, fig. 2 ({\male}); Jordan, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 109, t. 49 <i>c</i>; Verity, 1911, pp. 1xxix {amp; 1xxxii, p1. A, fig. 9; Evans 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 58, p1. vi, fig. A 11.1 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> dull black crossed by eight ochraceous-white lines; the basal, subbasal, and first discal lines are continued in a series of more or less diffuse curves to the inner margin; the second discal line terminates on vein 3; beyond apex of cell a somewhat broken post-discal line from costa to vein 3, followed by a second post-discal line from costa to inner margin; a third post-discal line is short, somewhat ill-defined, and terminates on vein 4; a complete submarginal line; all the lines expect those that cross the cell formed of a series of short curved lines separated by the veins. Hind wing with similar ochraceous-white lines more or less in continuation of those on the fore wing, with the addition of a broad line along vein 1 and the median vein; these two lines do not reach much beyond the base of vein 4; a large posterior patch, the proximal half scarlet, the distal half velvety black, followed by broad submarginal bright yellow lunules in across 1 to 4; distal half of posterior patch in areas 1 and 2 with very large, ill-defined, superposed white spots thickly shaded with brownish-grey except along their inner margins; tails edged very narrowly with ochraceous-white.    </p>

<p>Fig. 68.----<i>Armandia lidderdalei lidderdalei</i> (Atk.), {\male}.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar to above, all the markings broader. Hind wing with base of cell crossed by a short ochraceous-white bar, and the edges of the precostal cell with narrow lines of the same colour. Antenn{\ae} black; head thorax, and abdomen dull black; thorax greenish-grey laterally, sides of abdomen with cross-lines of ochrceous-white.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 90-110 mm.</p>

<p><i>Historical.---A. Lidderdalei</i> was first discovered by Dr.Lidderdale in 1868 in Bhutan, at about 6,000 feet, near Buxa. Between 1886 and 1890 the late H.J. Elwes sent three parties of native collectors from Darjeeling to procure the insect. The first was plundered by Bhotias, the second was attacked by fever and one of its members died, the third had a man killed by a tiger, and all returned unsuccessful. Specimens were later procured by Mr. A. V. Knyvett, then Inspector of police, who gave them to Mr. Elwes. The late  W  Doherty visited the Naga Hills in 1890 and found this butterfly more abundant in the neighbourhood of Mas, Manipur, at 6,000 to 8,000 feet. His description of its habits was published by Elwes in the Proc. Zool. Soc. 1891, p. 249. While chasing one of the butterflies Doherty nearly lost his life by falling into one of the pits dug by the Nagas to catch tigers.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---``It generally keeps to the ridges, occasionally descending into the valley, once almost down to 5,000 feet Afterwards I found it on the western side of Japoo at 7,000-8,000 feet, and between the two places we got one or two every day. At Mas, in Manipur, I have taken worn specimens at 7,500-9,000 feet. My Lepchas, who collected at Buxa in Bhutan, say there is no chance of another brood. The butterfly drifts about among the tree-tops, rarely descending to the ground; the crimson of the hind wings is not so conspicuous as one might think, and if one again, its transparent dark grey wings being hardly distinguishable among the shadows, and it is blown about by the wind more like a dead leaf than a living insect. Its flight is much like that of <i>Hestia</i>, but less buoyant and circling, as might be expected from its angular wings; nevertheless its resemblance strikes one. Seen from above it must be much more conspicuous and is no doubt a protected insect; at the same time its weak flight may even add to its chance of escape, as it certainly does with <i>Hestia</i>, for it is impossible to calculate the direction in which it is making. The whole body and wings give out a delicious odour, which remains for some days after death. In some patterns and at some distance <i>Armandia</i> looks like <i>Danais tytia</i> Gray, which is very common in the same places. <i>Armandia</i> hovers about flowers like other <i>Papilios</i>. During rain it alights on a leaf and droops its fore wings over the hind ones, thus covering the bright colours'' (<i>Doherty</i>, 1.c.).</p>

<p>This butterfly is also recorded from the Naga Hills by Tytler (1912, p. 588). He found the males not uncommon, the females rare, at 5,500 to 7,000 feet, during the latter half of August, September, and the first half of October. Many specimens were captured on a white-flowering tree which comes into blossom towards the middle of September. Two females, after capture, laid eggs which were yellow, and very small for the size of the insect.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---BHUTAN, the NAGA and CHIN HILLS; rare.</p>

<p>Subfamily PARNASSIIN{\AE}.</p>

<p><i>Parnassiin{\ae}</i>, Kirby, 1896, p. 236 (part.).</p>

<p><i>Parnassiid{\ae}</i>, Elwes, 1886, p. 17.</p>

<p>Wings broad and rounded, the hind wing almost ovate, with incurved inner margin and no anal fold. Fore wing without the small transverse vein between 1 <i>b</i> cell (=median spur); vein 9 absent. Hind wing the precostal cell almost obsolete and no precostal spur. Antenna short, more or less club-shaped, the shaft being often ringed with black and white, Head small; frons rough-hairy; eye large; palpus short, acute, not projecting above the head. Thorax normal, densely hairy. Abdomen strongly hairy in the {\male}, in the {\female} sparsely hairy or with scarcely hairy; in <i>Parnassius</i> with a horny pouch at the apex below.</p>

<p>Wings white rarely yellow; distally with black spots and grey or blackish bands; hind wing often with red-spotted ocelli. Very variable in colour and pattern.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---Mountainous regions of Europe (except Great Britain) Asia and North America. The genera <i>Hypermnestra</i> and <i>Parnassius</i> occur in the Indian Region, the former reaching only to Baluchistan, whilst <i>Parnassius</i> ranges throughout the Himalayas.</p>

<p><i>Key to Genera</i>.</p>

<p>1.Fore wing with veins 10 and 7 from the
     same point. Hind wing with vein 8
     shorter than 1 <i>b</i> of the fore
     wing. Antennal club short, abrupt,
     and flattened {\female} without       <p>[M\'en\'etr., p. 253.</p>
     horny pouch. .. ..</p>                 <p>HYPERMNESTRA</p>
     
<p>2.Fore wing with veins 10 and 7 separate
     at origin. Hind wing with vein 8
     longer than 1 <i>b</i> of the fore
     wing. Antennal club gradually elongate
     and rounded. {\female} with               <p>[p. 256.</p>
     horny pouch</p>                         <p>PARNASSIUS Latr.,</p>
  
<p>Genus <b>HYPERMNESTRA</b> M\'en\'etries.</p>

<p><i>Hypermnestra</i>,M\'en\'etries, 1848, explic. p1. 6. fig. 1 (<i>helios</i> Nick.); Verity, 1905, pp. 1, 2, 36; Seitz, 1907, p. 18; Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, pp. 45-6; Bingham, 1907, p. 131; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 42; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 154(type <i>Ismene helios</i> Nick., 1846).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Fore wing: costa almost straight for three-fourths of its length from base, the apical fourth arched; apex blunt; outer margin straight convex; tornus broadly rounded; inner margin straight; cell slightly longer than half length of costa; veins 6 and 7 closely approximate at base, upper discocellular therefore very short, barely indicated; middle discocellular concave, long; veins 4 and 5 also closely approximate, lower discocellular therefore very short; vein 9 absent; vein from apical half of 7, terminating below apex of wing; veins 10 and 11 free, 10 from just below upper angle of cell, 11 from upper third of subcostal; vein 12 terminates on costa well beyond upper angle of cell; veins 12, 11, and 10 run very close together towards their apical halves, but neither anastomose nor touch. Hind wing elongate, irregularly pear-shaped; costa slightly arched, the curve continued abruptly and strongly along outer margin, tornul angle distinct; inner margin widely emarginate; cell somewhat longer than half the wing; veins 4 and 5 more or less approximate but not closely so, the discocellular between their bases erect; precostal vein curved outwards. Antenna short, about one-third length of costa of fore wing; club short abrupt, spatulate; head hairy in front, eyes smooth; palpi suberect, with a thick fringe of hair anteriorly; thorax and abdomen moderately stout.</p>

<p>The genus contains a single species.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---Western China.</p>

<p><b>Hypermnestra helios</b> (Nickerl). (Fig. 69, structure of imago).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Wings light straw-yellow. Fore wing marked with black in the cell and at apex, bearing a red, black-bordered, transverse patch beyond apex of cell. Hind wing below with yellowish-grey bands which show through on the upperside.</p>

<p>Fig. 69.---<i>Hypermnestra helios</i> (Nick.).</p>

<p><i>a</i>, ventation of apex of fore wing; <i>b</i>, club of antenna of <i>Hypermnestra</i>; <i>c</i>, club of antenna of <i>Parnassius</i>.</p>

<p><i>Egg</i>.---Pale green, deposited singly on the underside of a leaf.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---Thick-set, with yellow ground-colour upon which are pale green bands between and on the segments. Towards the middle each segment is whitish with a yellow ring just behind, and upon which are some separated black dots resembling small tubercles and each surmounted with very short hair. On <i>Zygophyllum turcomanicum</i> Fisch., family Zygophyllace{\ae}.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.---Short, thick, and obtuse, brownish or greyish-green.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---The butterflies are found on sunny slopes, where they suck at flowers. The pupa is formed underground.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---Turkestan and Persia to BALUCHISTAN. The specimens from Baluchistan constitute a slightly differentiated subspecies.</p>

<p>81. <b>Hypermnestra helios balucha</b> (Moore).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius balucha</i>, Moore, 1906 <i>a</i>, p. 47 (Baluchistan).</p>

<p><i>Hypermnestra balucha</i>, Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 47.</p>

<p><i>Hypermnestra helios balucha</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 58, p1. vi, fig. A 12.1 ({\male}); id.,1932 <i>b</i>, p. 198.</p>

<p><i>Hypermnestra helios</i>, Bingham (<i>non</i> Nick.), 1907, p. 131, figs. 35, 35 <i>a</i> (part.).</p>

<p>{\male}. <i>Upperside</i> white with a slight cream-yellow tint. Fore wing at the base densely, and on the costal margin lightly, irrorated with black scales; cell with a transverse black median band and a black apical spot, the latter extending from the costa along the discocellulars almost to the lower angle of cell; beyond the cell an oblique short black bar, widened posteriorly and with three superposed red spots, the middle spot minute, sometimes absent ; this is followed by an irregular submarginal black band, widened at the veins, widest near the costa, and gradually narrowed to a faint line posteriorly. Beyond this band the apex is marked with a small diffuse black patch, and the apices of the veins with black spots that are extended inwards to the submarginal band. Hind wing with base and dorsal margin broadly irrorated with black scales; a black upper discal and a subcostal spot, both generally centred with red; a submarginal series of slender black lunules; followed by a marginal row of transversely linear black spots; the discal and post-discal areas of wing darkened by the markings of the underside showing through. Cilia of both wings white alternated with black.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> with similar ground-colour. Fore wing markings as above, but the cell-spots, the spot in area 3, and the short bar beyond apex of cell larger, more intensely black, the red spots on the latter also larger; submarginal and marginal markings paler, more diffuse. Hind wing with basal, median,and submarginal broad transverse bands of irrorated black scales, all the bands, with their margins uneven and zigzag; outer margin of basal band with four transversely placed red spots, and transverse red discal spots edged with black, in area 1, 2, 5, and 7; a fine, more or less interrupted, black marginal line. Antenn{\ae} pale yellowish-white, the shafts obscurely ringed with black; head, thorax, and abdomen black, the head and thorax anteriorly with long greyish-white hairs ; underside of palpi, thorax, legs, and basal portion of abdomen similarly clothed.</p>

<p>{\female} (nominotypical form).---<i>Upperside</i> markings larger and more conspicuous than in the {\male}; an additinal large black spot in the middle  of area 1. Underside similar to that of the {\male}, but with the additional black spot as noted above.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 45-55 mm.</p>

<p>The above description of the {\male} is taken from Moore's type. The {\female} appears to be still unknown from Baluchistan.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---BALUCHISTAN; very rare. The type and a paratype are in the British Museum, the latter(from Coll. Evans) marked ``Nushki, April, 1905''; both were received from Mr.O. C. Ollenbach. There is a specimen labelled ``Kach'' in the Indian Museum. Evans (1932, p.198) did not meet with the species. 

<p>Genus <b>PARNASSIUS</b> Latreille.</p>

<p>(Fig. 70, pouches of the {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius</i> Latreille, 1804, pp. 185, pp. 185, 199 (<i>apollo</i>); id., 1805, p. 110; id., 1810, p. 440; Moore, 1902, p. 104; Verity, 1906, pp. 40, 102; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 19; id., 1907 <i>b</i>, pp. 5-8; Bingham, 1907,p. 116; Fruhstorfer. 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 109; Rothschild, 1918, p. 22; Bryk, 1922, p.68; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i> pp. 42, 58; Hemming, 1934 <i>a</i>, p. 155 (type, <i>Papilio apollo</i> Linn., 1758).</p>

<p><i>Tadumia</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 116; Bryk, 1913, p. 119.</p>

<p><i>Kailasius</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 118; Bryk, 1913, p. 120, fig. 2 (venation).</p>

<p><i>Koramius</i>, Moore, 1902,p. 120.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Wing broad, semi-diaphanous: character of markings very similar throughout the forms. Fore wing a rectangular triangle, the hind wing almost ovate. Fore wing with costa very slightly arched, apex broadly rounded; outer margin very convex; inner margin straight; cell generally about half length of wing or a little shorter; upper discocellular short or obsolete, middle concave, more than twice length of lower, lower one shaped obliquely inwards; veins 6 and 7 from apex of cell or very close together at base; 9 absent; 8 out of 7, closer to apex of cell than to apex of wing; 10 from just before or from apex, or out of 7 from just beyond apex of cell, typically free, but in some froms anastomosed with 11; 11 from apical half of subcostal vein. Hind wing with costal and outer margins in a continuous curve, apex therefore not well marked; tornus prominent, obtusely angular; inner margin concave. Antenna short, robust, about a third of the length of the fore wing, the shaft often ringed with white and black; club stout, gradual; palpus short, acute, not projecting above the head, thickly fringed with hair anteiorly; eye large and smooth. Thorax densely hairy. Abdomen strongly hairy in the {\male}, sparsely covered with hairs or almost without hairs in the {\female}. The {\female}, after fertilization, with an extended corneous anal pouch that varies in shape. This pouch originates from a quickly hardening substance discharged by the {\male} during copulation. The differences in the shape of the pouch are of great help in distinguishing a species or characterizing a group of species.</p>

<p><i>Larva</i>.---``Cylindrical, exceptionally tapering at both ends, diversely developed, but mostly of black colour and variously ornamented; head small, almost globular, in the neck a reversible fleshy fork (osmeterium); body covered with short hairy warts; apparently living gregariously when young; some species show a great liking for sunshine, whilst others are concealed in daytime'' (<i>Stichel</i>, 1907 a).</p>

<p>Fig. 70.---Anal pouces of fertilized females of <i>Parnassius</i>.</p>

<p><i>a, P. jacquemontii</i> Boisd.; <i>b, P. epaphus</i> Oberth.;  <i>c, P. hardwickei</i> Gray.</p>

<p><i>Pupa</i>.---Obtuse, thick, more or less, more or less cylindrical, light or dark brown, dusted with glaucous blue. Enclosed in a slight cocoon, to which it is attached by a few threads; pupation underground.</p>

<p><i>Habits</i>.---``These insects inhabit medium and high altitudes, certain species ascending as high as 20,000 feet. The flight is generally clumsy and fluttering. The Parnassii are visitors of flowers; they sit on the blossom with the wings expanded and are not difficult to catch while sucking the honey, being occasionally, when the weather is unfavourable, or towards evening, so benumbed that they are easily caught with the fingers or even taken off the flowers with the killing-bottle. The butterflies are very tenacious of life'' (<i>Stichel</i>, 1907 a).</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---As already noted. Thirteen species occur in the HIMALAYAS, and these comprise a number of subspecies and forms.The species of <i>Parnassius</i> are mostly very variable.</p>

<p><i>Key to Species</i>.</p>

<p>1. Fore wing vein 7 from 6, 10 and 11 free
      Antenn{\ae} white-ringed*.....</p>         <p>2.</p>
     
<p>Fore wing with vein 7 not from 6. 
   Amtenn{\ae} black, not white-ringed</p>      <p>...5.</p>
 
<p>2. {\female} pouch posteriorly keeled. Fore wing
      above with fringe not or hardly chequered.</p>  <p>3.</p>
     
<p>{\female} pouch not keeled. Fringe of fore wing  <p>p.266.</p>
     above prominently chequered.</p>    <p><i>epaphus</i> Oberth.,</p>

<p>3. Large species, with fore wing 33 mm.,and    <p>p.259.</p>
      with large red spots ..</p>    <p><i>tianschanica</i> Oberth.,</p>

<p>Small species, with fore wing 30mm., red
   spots less prominent.. .. .. ..</p>               <p>4.</p>

<p>4. Fore wing with post-discal dark band absent 
      or faint. Hind wing rarely with a red
      basal spot........</p>        <p><i>actius</i> Eversm., p. 262.</p>

<p>Fore wing with post-discal dark band prominent.
     Hind wing above usually with a red              <p>[p.263.</p>
     basal spot........</p>       <p><i>jacquemontii</i> Boisd.</p>

<p>5. Fore wing with veins 10 and 11 not 
      anastomosing, but may touch.</p>               <p>6.</p>

<p>Fore wing with veins 10 and 11 anastomosing.</p>           <p>9.</p>

<p>6. Fore wing with veins 6 and 7 from a point,
      and the origin of vein 10 far removed;
      upperside with spots at end f cell and
      middle of vein 1 <i>b</i> not joined       <p>[p. 269.</p>
      by a dark band...</p>           <p><i>hardwickei</i> Gray.</p>

<p>Fore wing with veins 6 and 7 separate at
    the base, usually the basesof 6, 7, and
    10 equidistant upperside with spots at 
    end f cell and middle of vein 1 <i>b</i> 
    black and joined to the former by a dark band...</p>  <p>7.</p>

<p>7. Comparatively small species. Hind wing 
      below with red basad spots obsolete. 
      Fore wing above with no red spot at base of 7.</p>    <p>8.</p>

<p>Large species. Hind wing below with red
   basal spots prominent. Hind wing above        <p>[Fruhst., p. 286.</p>
   with a red spot at base of 7..</p>     <p><i>imperater augustus</i></p>

<p>8. Hind wing with two anal ocelli, no
      antemarginal ones; discal ocellus               <p>[p.277.</p>
      placed away from the submarginal line... ..</p> <p><i>delphius</i> Eversm.,</p>

<p>Hind wing with five antemarginal ocelli; discal
   ocellus placed nearer the marginal border    <p>[p.272.</p>
   than to the cell....</p>    <p><i>stoliczkanus Feld.,</i></p>

<p>9. Fore wing with veins 10 and 7 well separated at the 
      base, 7 and 6 approximate. Comparatively small
      species. Hind wing above with the submarginal
      spots black, and discal band more or less
      complete, no red spots. ...</p>                    <p>10.</p>

<p>Very large species. Fore wing with vein 10
   from 7, 6 and 7 well separated at origin.
   Hind wing above with no spot at base of 
   7; a very large red spot between veins 4 and 6,
   usually white-centred, and a red or black       <p>[p.297.</p>
   basal bar in areas 1 and 2 </p>    <p><i>charltonius</i> Gray,</p>

<p>10. Fore wing above fringe black.  .. .</p>          <p>11.</p>

<p>Fore wing above fringe pale yellow
   or white...</p>                               <p>12.</p>

<p>11. Small species, with fore wing less than
       30 mm. Hind wing above with small
       red discal spots in 5 and 7, no spot
       at base of 7. Hind wing below with
       red basal spots...</p>          <p><i>simo</i> Gray, p. 288.</p>

<p>Large species, with fore wing 30 mm. No red
   Fore wing with the post-discal band of 
   separate small spots. Hind with                 <p>[p.287.</p>
   elongate ocellus in area 4.. ... </p>  <p><i>maharaja</i> Avin.,</p>

<p>12. Upperside white, without red spots.     <p>[p.293.</p>
       very small species..</p>  <p><i>hannyngtoni</i> Avin.,</p>

<p>Hind wing above with red spots.</p>   <p><i>acco</i> Gray, p. 294.</p>

<p>The classification of a number of the Indian forms is still in a state of uncertainly, owing chiefly to the lack material. In the present volume several forms are treated as races upon a consideration of the distribution; such treatment is provisional, and the acquisition of more material is much to be desired in order to obtain a more accurate conception of these forms.</p>

<p>It is also as yet uncertain whether <i>maharaja</i> Avin. and <i>stoliczkanus</i> Feld. represent distinct species; some authorities regard the latter as a form of <i>delphius</i> Eversm.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius tianschanica</b> Oberth\dd{u}r.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Ground-colour white to yellowish, sparsely irrorated with blackish scales; fore wing costal spots with small red centres, the spots on the inner margin very large, feebly dusted with red internally; vitreous margin of moderate width, the submarginal band not sharply defined. Hind wing with deep red centres to the ocelli and with feeble submarginal wedge-shaped spots. {\female} with keeled pouch.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---Turkestan, the Pamirs, Afghanistan, CHITRAL, and NORTH-WEST INDIA. There subspecies in the Indian region.</p>

<p>This species is better known as <i>discobolus</i> Alph.</p>

<p>82 <i>a</i>. <b>Parnassius tianschanica bingham</b> Bryk.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius tianschanica binghami</i>, Bryk, 1934, p. 28 ({\male} {\female}, Chitral, 11,000 feet).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius tianschanica (sic) insignis</i>, Evans, (<i>non</i> Staudinger), 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 58.</p>

<p>This represents a slightly differentiated subspecies closely allied to the form found in Afghanistan. This latter is called <i>superba</i> Groum-Grshimailo (1890), and is represented in fig. 71. This figure is taken from Verity, 1906-11, p1. xii, fig. 7 (<i>P.discobolus</i> var. <i>insignis</i> Staudinger).</p>

<p>{\male}. Differs from most specimens of <i>superba</i> by the much narrower inner vitreous border to the white submarginal band of the fore wing. Hind wing with the submarginal triangular black spots narrower than in <i>superba</i> and as in <i>insignis</i> Stgr.; the white cell-spot is prominent within the black proximal scaling, and is, on the whole, larger than in <i>superba</i>.</p>

<p>{\female}. Fore wing with the submarginal white band narrower than in the {\male}; the proximal vitreous border of this band is as narrow as in the {\male}, being much narrower than in the females pf <i>superba</i> and <i>insignis</i>; other markings as in the {\male}.</p>  

<p>Fig. 71.---<i>P.tianschamica superba</i> Gr.-Grsh., {\male} (Afghanistan). (After Veriy).</p>             

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 70-80 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL; rare, The British Museum contains specimens, from elevations of from 12,000 to 13,500 feet, from Shandur, Baroghil, Yarkhun, the Turicho Valley, and Mirocham, chiefly from the collection of W H.Evans.</p>

<p>Should no 82 <i>b, baroghila</i> Tytler, be proved to belong to the same race as <i>binghami</i>, the former name would be used, the latter representing a {\female} form only.</p>

<p>82 <i>b</i>. <b>parnassius tianschanica baroghila</b> Tytler. (Fig. 72, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius discobolus baroghila</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 250, p1. iv, fig. 1({\female}) (Chitral).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemonti baroghila</i>, Bollow, 1929, p. 75.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. ``This form is smaller than <i>P.discobolus</i> from the Shandum Pass and not so dark. The females have no red tornal spots on the hind wing and agree with <i>P. discobolus</i> from the Shandum Pass in this respect'' (<i>Tytler</i>, 1, <i>c</i>.).</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 64-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL; rare. Taken on the Baroghila Pass at the extreme north-east corner of Chitral.</p>

<p>Fig. 72.---<i>P.tianschanica baroghila</i> Tytl.,{\female}. (After Tytler).</p>

<p>82 <i>c</i>. <b>Parnassius tianschanica hunzaica</b> Tytler. (Fig. 73, {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius discobolus hunuzaica</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 250, p1. iv, fig. 2 ({\female}) (Hunza: Misgar).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemonti hunuzaica</i>, Bollow, 1929, p. 75.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius rhodius</i>, Honrath, <i>auct</i>. (part.).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}.``This form is very like <i>P.D. baroghila</i>, but averages smaller and is much darker, especially in the females, which are as dark as the females of <i>P.discobolus</i> from the Shandun Pass. It is very near, if not identical with, an unnamed form in the British Museum from the Hindu Kush, and which is the <i>rhodius</i> of other authors.</p>

<p>Fig. 73.---<i>P. tianschanica hunuzaica</i> Tytl.,{\female}. (After Tytler).</p>

<p>``<i>Expanse</i>: {\male}, 64 mm.; {\female}, 64-70 mm'' (<i>Tytler</i>, 1.c.).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---HUNZA: Misgar, August; rare.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius actius</b> Eversmann.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Allied to <i>tianschanica</i> Oberth. and <i>jacquemontii</i> Boisd.,the {\female} having  a carinate pouch. Fore wing with a narrow vitreous margin and with the submarginal spots not well developed, {\male} usually with only the anterior costal spot centred with red; in the {\female} both spots are red-centred. {\female} with submarginal markings more strongly developed; hind wing with grey basal area, and red basal spot rarely developed on upperside.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---Turkestan to the Transalai, CHITRAL, and KASHMIR. Three subspecies have been described recently from NORTH-WEST INDIA.</p>

<p>83 <i>a</i>. <b>Parnassius actius sulla</b> Bryk {amp; Eisner.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius actius sulla</i>, Bryk {amp; Eisner, 1934 <i>c</i>, p. 42.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Ground-colour well developed, in the {\female} much more strongly darkened. Fore wing with vitreous band broad to the inner margin, the submarginal band reaching the anal fold, and strongly curved as in <i>jacquemontii</i> Boisd. Hind wing with broad vitreous band, and with pronounced and extended inner black area; submarginal band of defined lunules  touches the vitreous band; an anal band below the cell; only the anterior costal spot is red-centred; ocelli of normal size, brick-red, and broadly ringed with black.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL: Baroghli Pass. Described from a single pair.</p>

<p>83 <i>b</i>.  <b>Parnassius actius catalina</b> Eisner {amp; Peschke.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius actius catalina</i>, Eisner{amp; Peschke, 1934, p. 41 (Gilgit).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. A well differentiated race, allied to <i>minuta</i> Verity. All markings, which tend also to disappear on the hind wing of {\male}.
{\male} with very small vitreous band, fore wing submarginal band shortened; costal spots small,and spot on inner margin very small; cell-spot of normal size; ocelli small inner black area of hind wing moderate, and proximally with only anal spots. {\female} resembles the {\male}, is larger and has relatively broader marginal and submarginal bands, also somewhat larger ocelli.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---GILGIT: Doubounni Mountains.</p>

<p>83 <i>c</i>. <b>Parnassius actius yelyangi</b> O. Bang-Haas.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius actius yelyangi</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 135 (S.Kashmir).</p>

<p>{\female}. Ground-colour pure white with deep black markings. Fore wing with four black costal spots. a smaller cell-spot, a reduced spot at end of cell, and a large spot on inner margin; submarginal and marginal bands weakly suffused with black; fringes and veins of both wings black. Hind wing with a marginal band of small spots; below with three indistinct red basal and two anal spots.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: 60 mm.</p>

<p>It occurs with <i>P. epaphus</i> Oberth. on the same ground, and contrasts with this by reason of its larger size and bright red ocelli bearing no trace of white centres.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SOUTH KASHMIR: Zanskar, Yelyang Pass, 13,500 feet, August. The most southerly point known for the species.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius jacquemontii</b> Boisduval.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. A comparatively small species. Fore wing with large costal spots and large inner marginal spot, all with red centres well developed; submarginal macular band sharply marked, extending to inner margin; fringe not or hardly chequered. Hind wing with large ocelli bearing a white pupil; submarginal lunules broad; a red anal spot; black inner area narrow, without a projecting tooth at apex of cell. Antenna with white rings. {\female} with carinate pouch.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---WESTERN HIMALAYAS to Turkestan, Tibet, and China. Three subspecies occur in the Indian area.</p>

<p>84 <i>a</i>. <b>Parnassius jacquemontii chitralensis</b> Moore.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius chitralensis</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 107, p1. 406, figs. 2, 2 <i>a</i> (Chitral); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 29; Binham, 1907, p. 119; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii chitralensis</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 59.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> pale creamy-white, both wings only slightly irrorated with diffuse black scales; body, base of the wings, and inner area of hind wing clothed with long white hairs. Fringes of both wings more or less speckled with black. Fore wing with a short bar across middle of cell, another along the discocellulars, and a diffuse post-discal series of lunules, black; in many specimens this series is incomplete and does not extend clearly across the wing; three or four crimson spots encircled with black, arranged as follows: one mid-way in area 1, two , sometimes three, beyond apex of cell in an oblique line from the costa; outer margin broadly hyaline, with minute black specks at the apices of the veins; cilia white. Hind wing with basal and inner area beneath the white hairs densely and broadly irrorated with black scales, the inner edge of this border irregular, rest of the wing with more diffuse black scaling; five or six black-ringed crimson spots as follows; two, sometimes three, obliquely above the tornus, these, or one of them, occasionally white-centred; one in the middle of areas 5 and 7 respectively, these generally centred with white; one pure crimson spot at extreme base of wing; a post-discal series of black lunules as on fore wing, but the lunules not so well defined and generally separate from one another; a distinct hyaline outer marginal border, but the cream-white scaling extending to the margin; marginal black specks on the veins and white cilia as on fore wing.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> shining, with more or less of a glazed appearance; markings much as on the upperside, but indicated as much by those of the upperside, which show through as by actual scaling; hind wing with a subbasl transverse series of four dull crimson spots, while the crimson spots beyond are all more or less white-centred. Antenn{\ae} deep brownish-black, rarely with a few white specks on the underside; head thorax, and abdomen, beneath the covering of white hair, black. {\female} usually with more black irroration, and with larger and more brilliant crimson spots. Pouch with a sharp, high, posterior carina.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 55-70 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL; not rare.</p>

<p>84 <i>b</i>. <b>Parnassius jacquemontii shandura</b> Tytler. (Fig. 74,{\male} {\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii shandura</i>, Tytler, 1926, p. 250, p1. iv, figs. 3 ({\male}), 4 ({\female}) (Chitral); Bollow, 1929, p. 75.</p>

<p>Fig. 74.---<i>jacquemontii shandura</i> Tytl., {\male} {\female}. (After Tytler).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. ``This is the smallest and palest form of <i>P.jacquemontii</i> in the north-west of India; the males are very white-looking and both sexes either entirely lack or have or have very little dusky powdering on the wings. The females have red tornal spots on both sides of the hind wing.</p>

<p>``<i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 60-64 mm.'' (Tytler, 1. c.).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL: Shandur Pass, not rare.</p>

<p>84 <i>c</i>. <b>Parnassius jacquemontii jacquemontii</b> Boisduval.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii</i>, Boisduval, 1836, p. 400 ({\male}, <i>non</i> {\female}); Oberth\dd{u}r, 1879, p. 23, p1. 11, fig. 5 ({\male}); Mackinnon {amp; de Nic\'eville, 1898, p. 596; Moore. 1902, p. 105, p1. 406, figs 1-1<i>e</i>; Verity, 1906, p. 62, 1. xiii, figs. 16 ({\male}), 17 ({\female}); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 29; Bingham, 1907, p. 118, p1. 15, fig. 99 ({\female}); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 110, t. 50 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii jacquemontii</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>,  p. 59.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius actius</i> var. <i>himalayensis</i>, Elwes, 1886, p. 30.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii himalayensis</i>, Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 29, t. 15 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius actius</i> var. <i>rhodius</i>, Honrath, 1882, p. 178, t. 2, fig. 6 ({\male}) (Kashmir).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius rhodius</i>, Verity, 1906, p. 60, p1. xiii, figs. 10 ({\male}), 11 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii</i> var. <i>rhodius</i>, Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 29; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii</i> var. <i>impunctata</i>, Austaut, 1899, p. 154; Bingham, 1907, p. 119; Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, t.50 <i>b</i> ({\male}) 
</p>

<p><i>Parnassius himalayensis</i> ab. <i>impunctata</i>, Stichel, 1909 <i>a</i>, p. 29.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii</i> f. <i>archonis</i>, Bryk, 1911, p. 54 (fig.{\male}); id., 1914, p. 177, t. 3, fig. 15 ({\male}).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Larger than <i>chitralensis</i>, more strongly irrorated with black, sometimes yellowish in colour.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 65-75 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---There are three of the named forms which are worth nothing:-</p>

<p><b>(1) rhodius</b> Honrath.---Distinguished by the sharper and more distinct marginal bands, fore wing costal spots without a red pupil, also the spot on inner margin plain black. Hind wing ocelli small and completely filled in with red.</p>

<p><b>(2) impunctata</b> Austaut.---Ground-colour almost white. Fore wing with the costal and inner marginal spots black and submarginal markings reduced. Hind wing without red basal spots, ocelli smaller and red strongly edged with black.</p>

<p><b>(3) archonis</b> Bryk.---Underside with red scales in the submarginal band, which in some cases extend to the hyaline margin.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---KASHMIR to KUMAON; rare.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius epaphus</b> Oberth\dd{u}r.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. A smaller species than <i>jacquemontii</i> Boisd. Ground-colour pure white, with the vitreous marginal bands much narrower than in <i>jacquemontii</i>. Hind wing with the red ocelli rarely pupilled, and then only in the {\female}; anal spots only slightly dusted with red. Fringes of both wings distinctly chequered. Antenn{\ae} ringed with black and white (rarely quite black), which easily distinguishes the species from <i>jacquemontii</i>{\female} pouch not carinate, but bearing transverse folds at the broader end.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---CHITRAL to BHUTAN, Turkestan to Amdo and South-East China. In the Indian area four subspecies may be distinguished.</p>

<p>85 <i>a</i>. <b>Parnassius epaphus cachemiriensis</b> Oberth\dd{u}r. (Fig. 75, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus</i> var. <i>cachemiriensis</i>, Oberth\dd{u}r, 1891, pp. 14, 17, 19, p1. 1, figs. 6, (Kashmir); Verity, 1906, 1909, pp. 72, 315, p1. xvii, figs. 3 ({\male}); 4 ({\female}); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 30, t. 15<i>c</i> ({\male} {\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 121, fig. 31 <i>b</i> (sphragis); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, 1908<i>b</i>, p. 111; O Bang-haas, 1915, p. 175, t. v, fig. 29.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius nirius</i>, Moore, 1902, p. 108, p1. 407, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i>, (Ladak).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius jacquemontii</i> f. <i>nirius</i>, Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 29, t. 15 <i>b</i>.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus nirius</i>, Verity, 1911, p. 315, p1. x1iv, figs. 4 ({\male}), 5 ({\female}); Bingham, 1907, p. 121; Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 59, p1. vi, fig. A 13.3 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus epicus</i>, Bryk {amp; Eisner, 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 41 (Gigit).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus epicus</i> ab, <i>exoulata</i>, O. Bang-haas, 1937, pp. 329-30, fig. 2 (Baltistan: Skardo, 3,500 m., July).</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Averages a little larger size. The deeper black markings are slightly reduced. The red basal spot on hind wing is absent. The ocelli are more widely bordered with black, and are orange-red or yellow.</p>
s
<p>Fig. 75.---<i>P.epaphus cachemiriensis</i> Oberth., {\male} (Chonging Valley, 4,500-5,000 m.). (After Verity).</p>    

<p>In the form <b>exoculata</b> O. B. H. the markings in the distal areas are absent from both wing on the upperside; on the underside these markings are absent from the fore wing and are barely visible on the hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 50-60 mm.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL to KUMAON : not rare.</p>

<p>85 <i>b</i>. <b>Parnssius epaphus hinducucica</b> Bang-Haas.</p> 

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus hinducucica</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 7(Hindukush)</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Distinguished from <i>cachemiriensis</i> by the much reduced submarginal spots on both wings; these spots are often quite absent in the male. The ocelli are very small, and the costal spots of fore wing are rarely centred with red.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>:{\male} {\female}, 50-55 mm. </p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---N. KASHMIR; CHITRAL; Hindukush: Karambar Pass 18,566 feet (36' 55' N. lat., 73' 45' E. long), in September.</p>

<p>85 <i>c</i>. <b>Parnassius epaphus hillensis</b> Bang-Haas. (Fig. 76, {\male} ; 77, {\male} form).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus hillensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1915, p. 175 (Bashahr: Spiti); id., 1927, p. 21, t. 3, figs. 7 ({\male}), 8 ({\female}); Bollow, 1929, p.75.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius bashahrecus</i>, O.Bang-Haas, 1915, p. 175 p1. v, figs. 22, 27 ({\male}); id., 1927, p. 21, p1. 3, fig. 11 ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus hillensis</i> f. <i>bashahrecus</i>, Bllow, 1929, p. 76.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}, The author of this name considered it to represent a variable race resembling <i>cachemiriensis</i>. The wing-contour is more truncate, and the ocelli and all red markings are larger, the latter more numerous.</p>

<p>Fig. 76.---<i>P.epaphus hillensis</i> O.B.H.,{\male}. (After Bang-Haas).</p>

<p>A curious {\male} specimen (called <i>bashahrecus</i>, fig. 77) from the same locality was at first thought to represent another species, and afterwards to be a hybrid between <i>epaphus</i> Oberth. and <i>jacquemontii</i> Boisd. It may be regarded as an individual form. The antenn{\ae} are entirely black. Compared with <i>cachemiriensis</i> the black markings are still further reduced, and there is no black discal dusting in area 2 and 3 of fore wing. Compared with <i>hillensis</i>, on the fore wing the four posterior submarginal spots are smaller. The ocellus in 1 <i>b</i> is larger and more rounded, as in <i>sikkimensis</i>.</p>

<p>Fig.77.---<i>P. epaphus hillensis</i> f. <i>bashahrecus</i> O. B. H., {\male} (After Bang-Haas).</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---The Spiti district of BASHAHR; rare.</p>

<p>85 <i>d</i>. <b>Parnassius epaphus sikkimensis</b> Elwes.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus</i> var. <i>sikkimensis</i>, Elwes, 1882, p. 399, 401, p1. 25, figs 4 ({\female}), 5 ({\male}) (Sikkim); Verity, 1906, pp. 73, 74, p1. xvii, figs. 10, 12, 13 ({\male}), 11 ({\female}); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 30; Bingham, 1907, p. 121, p1. 15, fig, 100; Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, t. 3, fig. 1 ({\male}); Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 59.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Smallerthan <i>cachemiriensis</i>, averaging an expanse of only 44-50 mm. as against 60 mm. in the former. Distinguished also by its heavier black markings, the ground-colour also often sprinkled with black scales. Red scaling of the ocelli reduced, and no red scaling elsewhere. Antenn{\ae} conspicuously ringed with white.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---SIKKIM; common, at and above 16,000 feet.</p>

<p>85 <i>e</i>. <b>Parnassius epaphus phariensis</b> Avinoff. (Fig. 78, {\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius epaphus phariensis</i>, Avinoff, 1915, p. 360, p1. 1iv, figs. 8 ({\male}), 9 ({\female}) (Phari-Jong); Bollow, 1929, p. 76.</p>

<p>Distinguished from <i>sikkimensis</i> by the very greatly increased development of all the black markings. The red centres of the spots and ocelli are very marked on both pairs of wings; ocelli of hind wing usually united by a dark bar.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i> BHUTAN: Phari-Jong.</p>

<p><b>Parnassius hardwickei</b> Gray.</p>

<p>{\male} {\female}. Fore wing with veins 6 and 7 from a point and origin of vein 10 far removed. <i>Upperside</i> of fore wing with spots at the end of the cell and middle of area 1 usually red, but not joined by a dark band; the submarginal band a row of contiguous spots. Hind wing above usually without a red spot at base of area 7; marginal spots strongly developed, shaded with blue and centred with white. Hind wing below with prominent red basal spots, the submarginal spots greenish.</p>

<p>Fig. 78.---<i>P. epaphus phariensis</i> Avin., {\male}. (After Avinoff).</p>

<p>{\female} more abundantly marked with black and red than the {\male}. Pouch bladder-like and produced backwards; it is laterally flattened, and provided beneath with a longitudinal groove.</p>

<p>There are two broods, a pale dry-season and a dark wet-season form.</p>

<p><i>Distribution</i>.---CHITRAL to SIKKIM, being restricted to the Himalayas; two subspecies may be distinguished.</p>

<p>86 <i>a</i>. <b>Parnassius hardwickei hardwickei</b> Gray.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i>, Gray, 1831, p. 32 (Kashmir); id., 1846, p. 7, p1. 4, figs. 1, 1 <i>a</i> {\male}; id., 1852, p. 76, p1. 12, figs. 8, 11 ({\female}), 10 ({male}); Staudinger {amp; Schatz, 1884, p. 22, t. 14 ({\male}); Moore, 1902, p. 111 (part), p1. 408, figs 1 <i>d-g</i>, p1. 409, figs. 1 <i>c</i> (trans.), 1 <i>d-g</i>; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 31, t. 15 <i>b</i> {\male}; id., 1907 <i>b</i>. pp. 36-37; Bingham, 1907, pp. 117, 121, 122, p1. 15, fig. 101 ({\male}); Verity, 1907, p. 39, p1. xxi, fig. 17 ({\male}); Fruhstorfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei hardwickei</i>, Evans, 1932 <i>a</i>, p. 59, p1. vi fig A 13.4 ({\female}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> f. <i>charino</i>, Gray, 1852, p. 76, p1. 12, figs. 12, 13, 14 ({\male}), 15 ({\female}); Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 31; Verity, 1907, p. 90; Stichel, 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 37; Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>b</i>, p. 111, t. 50 <i>d</i>, ({\male}).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> var. <i>otos</i>, Fruhstorfer, 1903 <i>b</i>, p. 46; Stichel, 1907 <i>a</i>, p. 31; id., 1907 <i>b</i>, p. 37; Fruhstrfer, 1908 <i>b</i>, p. 111, t. 50 C; Evans, 1914 <i>a</i>, p. 766.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei</i> ab. <i>natuposterior</i>, O. Bang-haas, 1927, p. 35, t. 2, fig. 14 ({\male}) (Simla);Bellow, 1929, p. 76.</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei punjabensis</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 8 (Punjab).</p>

<p><i>Parnassius hardwickei baltistani</i>, O. Bang-Haas, 1934 <i>b</i>, p. 8.</p>

<p>{\male}<i>Upperside</i> creamy-white. Fore wing with base and costal margin densely irrorated with black scales; a broad, short velvety black bar across middle of cell, another along the discocelllars, and a third beyond apex of cell, this latter with superposed spots of crimson where the bar crosses the bases of areas 5 and 8; a crimson-centred black spot in middle of area 1; an irregularly curved prominent post-discal series of dusky spots, so arranged as to leave a narrow edging of the creamy-white ground-colour beyond, which is traversed by the black veins; the four anterior spots of the post-discal series fused to from a broad, continuous, but short curved band; outer margin broadly dusky black; cilia white. Both the dusky black band and the post-discal dusky black markings subhyaline. Hind wing with base and inner margin broadly dusky black, the inner edge of the black coloration on the latter deeply but irregularly biemarginate; a crimson-centred black spot near base of area 5, another just beyond middle of area 7, followed by a very conspicuous curved post-discal series of five dull blue ocelli ringed with black and centred with white, and a narrow, diffuse dusky black marginal band; cilia white.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> similar, with a glassy appearance. Fore wing with markings of upperside visible by transparency; the white scaling of the upperside replaced by scale-like hairs of the same colour; the only scaled markings are the black cell-bars, three small crimson spots beyond. and the black-ringed crimson spot in area 1. Hind wing with the white scaling along the basal half of the costal margin nearly as on upperside, the rest hair-like as on underside of fore wing; a broad basal band of four red spots followed by a discal irregular series of five similarly-coloured spots, the lower three formed into a short oblique band above the tornal angle; all the crimson spot ringed more or less obsoletely by black, and the following prominently centred with white: the spot in areas 2 and 5 and the basal and median spots in area 7.</p>

<p>{\female}. Similar; the dusky black irroration on upperside of fore wing more extensive and formed into a narrow irregular band below the cell, which runs between the crimson spots beyond apex of cell and the crimson spot in area 1; the crimson spots larger, with an additional spot in area 6 of fore wing and a pretornal spot on hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Underside</i> Similar to that of {\male}, but all the red spots much larger and centred with white. Antenn{\ae} nearly black, with only a few white specks; head with brownish-yellow pubescence; rest of thorax and abdomen covered densely with long white hair which also clothes, more or less narrowly, the inner margin of hind wing.</p>

<p><i>Expanse</i>: {\male} {\female}, 55-65 mm.</p>

<p><i>Variation</i>.---The nominotypical form described above represents the dry form. Very light specimens have received the name of <b>otos</b> Fruhst. The pattern is much reduced, partly diffuse, especially the submarginal band of the fore wing; upperside red spots absent. Hind wing with only a small anterior ocellus, the submarginal spots intensely black, without blue shading. Represents an extreme dry form.</p>

<p><i>Wet-season form</i> <b>charino</b> Gray.---{\male} {\female}. <i>Upperside</i> more or less completely and densely irrorated with dusky black, from which, on the fore wing, two bars that cross the cell, a short oblique bar beyond its apex, a post-discal spot near costa beyond the crimson spots, and a submarginal series of spots stand out conspicuously white; on the hind wing the interval between the basal and post-medial crimson spots in area 7 is also prominently white.</p>

<p><i>Upperside</i> with markings showing through from above, fore wing apical area and outer margin, and hind wing entirely, conspicuously suffused with greenish-yellow.</p>

<p>The name <i>natuposterior</i> O.B.-H. is a synonym of <i>charino</i>.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---The larva feeds on Saxifrage. The species occurs in Kashmir and Simla all the year round. The wet-season or autumn form occurring from July to October, appears to hibernate, and hibernation also takes place in the pupal stage. The butterfly prefers grassy mountain-peaks near the snow-line The lighter forms fly between 7,500 and 9,000 feet, the dark ones from 10,000 to 15,000 feet.</p>

<p><i>Habitat</i>.---CHITRAL to KUMAON; common.</p>

<p>Whether specimens from the Punjab and Baluchistan can be considered as forming distinct races is a question which may be left to the student who can compare large material.</p>

</html>

